9.2 Hunters Give Place to Herdsmen
================================================================

.. _Figure 73:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0073.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0073.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 73

    Figure 73: Reindeer Age Engravings and Carvings

It was about 12,000 or fewer years ago that, with the spread of forests and a
great change of the fauna, the long prevalence of the hunting life in Europe
drew to its end. Reindeer vanished. Changing conditions frequently bring with
them new diseases. There may have been prehistoric pestilences. For many
centuries there may have been no men in Britain or Central Europe (Wright).
For a time there were in Southern Europe drifting communities of some little
known people who are called the Azilians.\ [#fn3]_ They may have been transition
generations; they may have been a different race. We do not know. Some
authorities incline to the view that the Azilians were the first wave of a
race which, as we shall see later, has played a great part in populating
Europe, the dark-white or Mediterranean or Iberian race. These Azilian people
have left behind them a multitude of pebbles, roughly daubed with markings of
an unknown purport (see :ref:`Figure 73`). The use or significance of these
Azilian pebbles is still a profound mystery. Was this some sort of token
writing? Were they counters in some game? Did the Azilians play with these
pebbles or tell a story with them, as imaginative children will do with bits,
of wood and, stone nowadays? At present we are unable to cope with any of
these questions.

We will not deal here with the other various peoples who left their scanty
traces in the world during the close of the New Paleolithic period, the
spread of the forests where formerly there had been steppes, and the wane of
the hunters, some 10,000 or 12,000 years ago. We will go on to describe the
new sort of human community that was now spreading over the northern
hemisphere, whose appearance marks what is called the *Neolithic Age.* The
map of the world was assuming something like its present outlines; the
landscape and the flora and fauna were taking on their existing
characteristics. The prevailing animals in the spreading woods of Europe were
the royal stag, the great ox, and the bison; the mammoth and the musk ox had
gone. The great ox, or aurochs, is now extinct, but it survived in the German
forests up to the time of the Roman Empire. It was never domesticated.\ [#fn4]_
It stood eleven feet high at the shoulder, as high as an elephant. There were
still lions in the Balkan Peninsula, and they remained there until about
1,000 or 1,200 B.C. The lions of Wurttemberg and South Germany in those days
were twice the size of the modern lion. South Russia and Central Asia were
thickly wooded then, and there were elephants in Mesopotamia and Syria, and a
fauna in Algeria that was tropical African in character.

Hitherto men in Europe had never gone farther north than the Baltic Sea or
the British Isles, but now the Scandinavian Peninsula and perhaps Great
Russia were becoming possible regions for human occupation. There are no
Paleolithic remains in Sweden or Norway. Man, when he entered these
countries, was apparently already at the Neolithic stage of social
development.

.. [#fn3] From the cave at Mas d'Azil.

.. [#fn4] But our domestic cattle are derived from some form of aurochs — probably from some lesser Central Asiatic Variety. —H. H. J.
