
23.6 The Successors of Alexander
========================================================================

.. _Figure 336:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0336.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0336.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 336

    Figure 336: Seleucus

    *Tetradrachm* with head of Seleucus I.

From this welter of crime there presently emerged three
leading figures. Much of the old Persian empire, as far as the Indus eastward
and almost to Lydia in the west, was held by one general Seleucus, who founded
a dynasty, the Seleucid Dynasty; Macedonia fell to another Macedonian general,
Antigonus; a third Macedonian, Ptolemy, secured Egypt, and making Alexandria
his chief city, established a sufficient naval ascendancy to keep also Cyprus
and most of the coast of Phoenicia and Asia Minor. The Ptolemaic and Seleucid
empires lasted for a considerable time; the forms of government in Asia Minor
and the Balkans were more unstable. Two maps will help the reader to a sense of
the kaleidoscopic nature of the political boundaries of the third century B.C.
Antigonus was defeated and killed at the battle of Ipsus (301), leaving
Lysimachus, the governor of Thrace, and Cassander, of Macedonia and Greece, as
equally transitory successors. Minor governors carved out smaller states.
Meanwhile the barbarians swung down into the broken-up and enfeebled world of
civilization from the west and from the east. From the west came the Gauls, a
people closely related to the Kelts. They raided down through Macedonia and
Greece to Delphi, and (227 B.C.) two sections of them crossed the Bosphorus
into Asia Minor, being first employed as mercenaries and then setting up for
themselves as independent plunderers; and after raiding almost to the Taurus,
they settled in the old Phrygian land, holding the people about them to
tribute. (These Gauls of Phrygia became the Galatians of St. Paul's Epistle.)
Armenia and the southern shores of the Black Sea became a confusion of changing
rulers. Kings with Hellenistic ideas appeared in Cappadocia, in Pontus (the
south shore of the Black Sea), in Bithynia, and in Pergamum. From the east the
Scythians and the Parthians and Bactrians also drove southward. . . . For a
time there were Greek-ruled Bactrian states becoming more and more Orientalised;
in the second century B.C. Greek adventurers from Bactria raided down into
North India and founded short-lived kingdoms there, the last eastward fling of
the Greek; then gradually barbarism fell again like a curtain between the
Western civilizations and India.
