14.2.5 The Chaldean Empire
================================================================

The Assyrian empire lasted only a hundred and fifty years after Sargon II.
Fresh nomadic Semites coming from the south coast, the Chaldeans, assisted by
two Aryan-speaking peoples from the north, the Medes and Persians, combined
against it, and took Nineveh in 606 B.C.

The `Chaldean Empire`_, with its capital at Babylon (Second Babylonian
Empire), lasted under `Nebuchadnezzar the Great`_ (Nebuchadnezzar II) and his
successors until 539 B.C. when it collapsed before the attack of `Cyrus`_,
the founder of the Persian power....

.. _Chaldean Empire: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chaldean_Empire
.. _Nebuchadnezzar the Great:
    http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nebuchadnezzar_II
.. _Cyrus: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyrus_the_Great

So the story goes on. In 330, B.C. as we shall tell later in some detail, a
Greek conqueror, Alexander the Great, is looking on the murdered body of the
last of the Persian rulers.

The story of the Tigris and Euphrates civilizations, of which we have given
as yet only the bare outline, is a story of conquest following after
conquest, and each conquest replaces old rulers and ruling classes by new;
races like the Sumerian and the Elamite are swallowed up, their languages
vanish, they interbreed and are lost, the Assyrian melts away into Chaldean
and Syrian, the Hittites become Aryanised and lose distinction, the Semites
who swallowed up the Sumerians give place to Aryan rulers, Medes and Persians
appear in the place of the Elamites the Aryan Persian language dominates the
empire until the Aryan Greek ousts it from official life. Meanwhile the
plough does its work year by year, the harvests are gathered, the builders
build as they are told, the tradesmen work and acquire fresh devices; the
knowledge of writing spreads, novel things, the horse and wheeled vehicles
and iron, are introduced and become part of the permanent inheritance of
mankind; the volume of trade upon sea and desert increases, men's ideas
widen, and knowledge grows. There are set-backs, massacres, pestilence; but
the story is, on the whole, one of enlargement. For four thousand years this
new thing, civilization, which had set its root into the soil of the two
rivers, grew as a tree grows; now losing a limb, now stripped by a storm, but
always growing and resuming its growth. After four thousand years the
warriors and conquerors were still going to and fro over this growing thing
they did not understand, but men had now (330 B.C.) got iron, horses, writing
and computation, money, a greater variety of foods and textiles, a wider
knowledge of their world.

The time that elapsed between the empire of Sargon I and the conquest of
Babylon by Alexander the Great was as long, be it noted, at the least
estimate, as the time from Alexander the Great to the present day. And before
the time of Sargon, men had been settled in the Sumerian land, living in
towns, worshipping in temples, following an orderly Neolithic agricultural
life in an organized community for at least as long again. "Eridu, Lagash,
Ur, Uruk, Larsa, have already an immemorial past when first they appear in
history."\ [#fn8]_

One of the most difficult things for both the writer and student of history
is to sustain the sense of these time-intervals and prevent these ages
becoming shortened by perspective in his imagination. Half the duration of
human civilization and the keys to all its chief institutions are to be found
*before* Sargon I. Moreover, the reader cannot too often compare the scale of
the dates in these latter fuller pages of man's history with the succession
of countless generations to which the time diagrams given in Figures :ref:`11 <Figure 11>`
and :ref:`47 <Figure 47>` bear witness.

.. [#fn8] Winckler (Craig), :t:`History Of Babylonia And Assyria`

.. _History Of Babylonia And Assyria: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1406715239?ie=UTF8&tag=mindvessel-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=1406715239

