14.3 The Early History of Egypt
================================================================

.. _Figure 142:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0142.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0142.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 142

    Figure 142: Time Chart 6000 B.C. to A.D.

Parallel with the ancient beginnings of civilization in Sumeria, a parallel
process was going on in Egypt. It is still a matter of discussion which was
the most ancient of these two beginnings, or how far they had a common origin
or derived one from the other.

The story of the Nile valley from the dawn of its traceable history until the
time of Alexander the Great is not very dissimilar from that of Babylonia;
but while Babylonia lay open on every side to invasion, Egypt was protected
by desert to the west and by desert and sea to the east, while to the south
she had only negro peoples. Consequently her history is less broken by the
invasions of strange races than is the history of Assyria and Babylon, and
until towards the eighth century B.C. when she fell under an Ethiopian
dynasty, whenever a conqueror did come into her story, he came in from Asia
by way of the Isthmus of Suez.

The Stone Age remains in Egypt are of very uncertain date; there are
Paleolithic and then Neolithic remains. It is not certain whether the
Neolithic pastoral people who left those remains were the direct ancestors of
the later Egyptians. In many respects they differed entirely from their
successors. They buried their dead, but before they buried them they cut up
the bodies and apparently ate portions of the flesh. They seem to have done
this out of a feeling of reverence for the departed; the dead were "eaten
with honour" according to the phrase of Mr. Flinders Petrie. It may have been
that the survivors hoped to retain thereby some vestige of the strength and
virtue that had died. Traces of similar savage customs have been found in the
long barrows that were scattered over western Europe before the spreading of
the Aryan peoples, and they have pervaded Negro Africa, where they are only
dying out at the present time.

.. _Figure 143:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0143.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0143.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 143

    Figure 143: Egyptian Hippopotamus Goddess

About 5,000 B.C., or earlier, the traces of these primitive peoples cease,
and the true Egyptians appear on the scene. The former people were hut
builders and at a comparatively low stage of Neolithic culture, the latter
were already a civilized Neolithic people; they used brick and wood buildings
instead of their predecessors' hovels, and they were working stone. Very soon
they passed into the Bronze Age. They possessed a system of picture writing
almost as developed as the contemporary writing of the Sumerians, but quite
different in character. Possibly there was an irruption from southern Arabia,
by way of Aden, of a fresh people, who came into upper Egypt and descended
slowly towards the delta of the Nile. Dr. Wallis Budge writes of them as
"conquerors from the East". But their gods and their ways, like their picture
writing, were very different indeed from the Sumerian. One of the earliest
known figures of a deity is that of a hippopotamus goddess, and so very
distinctively African.

The clay of the Nile is not so fine and plastic as the Sumerian clay, and the
Egyptians made no use of it for writing. But they early resorted to strips of
the papyrus reed fastened together, from whose name comes our word "paper".

The broad outline of the history of Egypt is simpler than the history of
Mesopotamia. It has long been the custom to divide the rulers of Egypt into a
succession of Dynasties, and in speaking of the periods of Egyptian history
it is usual to speak of the first, fourth, fourteenth, and so on, Dynasty.
The Egyptians were ultimately conquered by the Persians after their
establishment in Babylon, and when finally Egypt fell to Alexander the Great
in 332 B.C., it was Dynasty XXXI that came to an end. In that long history of
over 4,000 years, a much longer period than that between the career of
Alexander the Great and the present day, certain broad phases of development
may be noted here. There was a phase known as the "old kingdom", which
culminated in the IVth Dynasty; this Dynasty marks a period of wealth and
splendour, and its monarchs were obsessed by such a passion for making
monuments for themselves as no men have ever before or since had a chance to
display and gratify. It was Cheops\ [#fn9]_ and Chephren and Mycerinus of this
IVth Dynasty who raised the vast piles of the great and the second and the
third pyramids at Giza.

These unmeaning sepulchral piles, of an almost incredible vastness,\ [#fn10]_
erected in an age when engineering science had scarcely begun, exhausted the
resources of Egypt through three long reigns, and left her wasted as if by a
war.

The story of Egypt from the IVth to the XVth Dynasty is a story of conflicts
between alternative capitals and competing religions, of separations into
several kingdoms and reunions. It is, so to speak, an internal history. Here
we can name only one of that long series of Pharaohs, Pepi II, who reigned
ninety years, the longest reign in history, and left a great abundance of
inscriptions and buildings. At last there happened to Egypt what happened so
frequently to the civilizations of Mesopotamia. Egypt was conquered by
nomadic Semites, who founded a "shepherd" dynasty, the Hyksos (XVIth), which
was finally expelled by native Egyptians. This invasion probably happened
while that first Babylonian Empire which Hammurabi founded was flourishing,
but the exact correspondences of dates between early Egypt and Babylonia are
still very doubtful. Only after a long period of servitude did a popular
uprising expel these foreigners again.

After the war of liberation (circa 1,600 B.C.) there followed a period of
great prosperity in Egypt, *the New Empire*. Egypt became a great and united
military state, and pushed her expeditions at last as far as the Euphrates,
and so the age-long struggle between the Egyptian and Babylonian-Assyrian
power began.

For a time Egypt was the ascendant power. Thothmes III\ [#fn11]_ and Amenophis
III (XVIIIth Dynasty) ruled from Ethiopia to the Euphrates in the fifteenth
century B.C. For various reasons these names stand out with unusual distinctness in the
Egyptian record. They were great builders, and left many monuments and
inscriptions. Amenophis III founded Luxor, and added greatly to Karnak. At
Tel-el-Amarna a mass of letters has been found, the royal
correspondence with Babylonian and Hittite and other monarchs, including that
Tushratta who took Nineveh, throwing a flood of light upon the political and
social affairs of this particular age. Of Amenophis IV we shall have more to
tell later, but of one, the most extraordinary and able of Egyptian monarchs,
Queen Hatasu, we have no space to tell. She is represented
upon her monuments in masculine garb, and with a long beard as a symbol of
wisdom.

Thereafter there was a brief Syrian conquest of Egypt, a series of changing
dynasties, among which we may note the XIXth, which included Rameses II, a
great builder of temples, who reigned seventy-seven years (about 1,317 to
1,250 B.C.), and who is supposed by some to have been the Pharaoh of Moses,
and the XXIInd, which included Shishak, who plundered Solomon's temple (circa
930 B.C.). An Ethiopian conqueror from the Upper Nile founded the XXVth
Dynasty, a foreign dynasty, which went down (670 B.C.) before the new
Assyrian Empire created by Tiglath Pileser III, Sargon II, and Sennacherib,
of which we have already made mention.

The days of any Egyptian predominance over foreign nations were drawing to an
end. For a time under Psammetichus I of the XXVIth Dynasty (664-610 B.C.)
native rule was restored, and Necho II recovered for a time the old Egyptian
possessions in Syria up to the Euphrates while the Medes and Chaldeans were
attacking Nineveh. From those gains Necho II was routed out again after the
fall of Nineveh and the Assyrians by Nebuchadnezzar II, the great Chaldean
king, the Nebuchadnezzar of the Bible. The Jews, who had been the allies of
Necho II, were taken into captivity by Nebuchadnezzar to Babylon.

When, in the sixth century B.C., Chaldea fell to the Persians, Egypt followed
suit, a rebellion later made Egypt independent once more for sixty years, and
in 332 B.C. she welcomed Alexander the Great as her conqueror, to be ruled
thereafter by foreigners, first by Greeks, then by Romans, then in succession
by Arabs, Turks, and British, until the present day.

Such briefly is the history of Egypt from its beginnings; a history first of
isolation and then of increasing entanglement with the affairs of other
nations, as increasing facilities of communication drew the peoples of the
world into closer and closer interaction.

.. [#fn9] 3,733 B.C., Wallis Budge.

.. [#fn10] The great pyramid is 450 feet high and its side 700 feet long. It is
    calculated (says Wallis Budge) to weigh 4,883,000 tons. All this stone was
    lugged into place chiefly by human muscle.

.. [#fn11] There are variants to these names, and to most Egyptian names, for few
    self-respecting Egyptologists will tolerate the spelling of their colleagues.
    One may find, for instance, Thethmosis, Thoutmosis, Tahutmes, Thutmose, or
    Tethmosis; Amunothph, Amenhotep or Amenothes. A pleasing variation is to
    break up the name, as, for instance, Amen Hetep. This particular little
    constellation of variants is given here not only because it is amusing, but
    because it is desirable that the reader should know such variations exist.
    For most names the rule of this book has been to follow whatever usage has
    established itself in English literature, regardless of the possible
    contemporary pronunciation. Amenophiis for example, has been so written in
    English books for two centuries. It came into the language by indirect
    routes, but it is now as fairly established as is Damascus as the English
    name of a Syrian town. Nevertheless, there are limits to this classicism. The
    writer, after some vacillation has abandoned Oliver Goldsmith and Dr. Johnson
    in the case of "Peisistratus" and "Keltic," which were formerly spelt
    "Pisistratus" and "Celtic."
