14.5 The Early History of China
================================================================

.. _Figure 149:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0149.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0149.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 149

    Figure 149: Map - The Cradle of Chinese Civilization

Meanwhile, as this triple system of White Man civilization developed in India
and in the lands about the meeting-places of Asia, Africa, and Europe,
another and quite distinct civilization was developing and spreading out from
the then fertile but now dry and desolate valley of the Tarim and from the
slopes of the Kuen-lun mountains in two directions down the course of the
Hwang-ho, and later into the valley of the Yangtse-kiang. We know practically
nothing as yet of the archaeology of China, we do not know anything of the
Stone Age in that part of the world, and at present our ideas of this early
civilization are derived from the still very imperfectly explored Chinese
literature. It has evidently been from the first and throughout a Mongolian
civilization. Until after the time of Alexander the Great there are few
traces of any Aryan or Semitic, much less of Hamitic influence. All such
influences were still in another world, separated by mountains, deserts, and
wild nomadic tribes until that time. The Chinese seem to have made their
civilization spontaneously and unassisted. Some recent writers suppose indeed
a connection with ancient Sumeria. Of course both China and Sumeria arose on
the basis of the almost world-wide early Neolithic culture, but the Tarim
valley and the lower Euphrates are separated by such vast obstacles of
mountain and desert as to forbid the idea of any migration or interchange of
people who had once settled down. Perhaps the movement from the north met
another movement of culture coming from the south.

Though the civilization of China is wholly Mongolian (as we have defined
Mongolian), it does not follow that the northern roots are the only ones from
which it grew. If it grew first in the Tarim valley, then unlike all other
civilizations (including the Mexican and Peruvian) it did not grow out of the
heliolithic culture. We Europeans know very little as yet of the ethnology
and pre-history of southern China. There the Chinese mingle, with such
kindred peoples as the Siamese and Burmese, and seem to bridge over towards
the darker Dravidian peoples and towards the Malays. It is quite clear from
the Chinese records that there were southern as well as northern beginnings
of a civilization, and that the Chinese civilization that comes into history
2,000 years B.C. is the result of a long process of conflicts, minglings and
interchanges between a southern and a northern culture of which the southern
may have been the earlier and more highly developed. The southern Chinese
perhaps played the role towards the northern Chinese that the Hamites or
Sumerians played to the Aryan and Semitic peoples in the west; or that the
settled Dravidians played towards the Aryans in India. They may have been the
first agriculturists and the first temple builders. But so little is known as
yet of this attractive chapter in pre-history that we cannot dwell upon it
further here.

The chief foreigners mentioned in the early annals of China were a Ural-
Altaic people on the north-east frontier, the Huns, against whom certain of
the earlier emperors made war.

Chinese history is still very little known to European students, and our
accounts of the early records are particularly unsatisfactory. About 2,700 to
2,400 B.C. reigned five emperors, who seem to have been almost incredibly
exemplary beings.

There follows upon these first five emperors a series of dynasties, of which
the accounts become more and more exact and convincing as they become more
recent. China has to tell a long history of border warfare and of graver
struggles between the settled and nomad peoples. To begin with, China, like
Sumer and like Egypt, was a land of city-states. The government was at first
a government of numerous kings; they became loosely feudal under an emperor,
as the Egyptians did; and then later, as with the Egyptians, came a
centralizing empire. Shang (1,750 to 1,125 B.C.) and Chow (1,125 to 250 B.C.)
are named as being the two great dynasties of the feudal period. Bronze
vessels of these earlier dynasties, beautiful, splendid, and with a
distinctive style of their own, still exist, and there can be no doubt of the
existence of a high state of culture even before the days of Shang.

It is perhaps a sense of symmetry that made the later historians of Egypt and
China talk of the earlier phases of their national history as being under
dynasties comparable to the dynasties of the later empires, and of such early
"Emperors" as Menes (in Egypt) or the First Five Emperors (in China). The
early dynasties exercised far less centralized powers than the later ones.
Such unity as China possessed under the Shang Dynasty was a religious rather
than an effective political union. The "Son of Heaven" offered sacrifices for
all the Chinese. There was a common script, a common civilization, and a
common enemy in the Huns of the north-western borders.

The last of the Shang Dynasty was a cruel and foolish monarch who burnt
himself alive (1,125 B.C.) in his palace after a decisive defeat by Wu Wang,
the founder of the Chow Dynasty. Wu Wang seems to have been helped by allies
from among the south-western tribes as well as by a popular revolt.

For a time China remained loosely united under the Chow emperors, as loosely
united as was Christendom under the popes in the Middle Ages; the Chow
emperors had become the traditional high priests of the land in the place of
the Shang Dynasty and claimed a sort of overlordship in Chinese affairs, but
gradually the loose ties of usage and sentiment that held the empire together
lost their hold upon men's minds. Hunnish peoples to the north and west took
on the Chinese civilization without acquiring a sense of its unity. Feudal
princes began to regard themselves as independent. Mr. Liang-Chi-Chao,\ [#fn12]_ one of the Chinese representatives at the Paris Conference of 1919,
states that between the eighth and fourth centuries B.C. "there were in the
Hwang-ho and Yang-tse valleys no less than five or six thousand small states
with about a dozen powerful states dominating over them". The land was
subjected to perpetual warfare ("Age of Confusion"). In the sixth century
B.C. the great powers in conflict were Ts'i and Ts'in, which were northern
Hwang-ho states, and Ch'u, which was a vigorous, aggressive power in the
Yang-tse valley. A confederation against Ch'u laid the foundation for a
league that kept the peace for a hundred years; the league subdued and
incorporated Ch'u and made a general treaty of disarmament. It became the
foundation of a new pacific empire.

The knowledge of iron entered China at some unknown date, but iron weapons
began to be commonly used only about 500 B.C., that is to say two or three
hundred years or more after this had become customary in Assyria, Egypt, and
Europe. Iron was probably introduced from the north into China by the Huns.

The last rulers of the Chow Dynasty were ousted by the kings of Ts'in, the
latter seized upon the sacred sacrificial bronze tripods, and so were able to
take over the imperial duty of offering sacrifices to Heaven. In this manner
was the Ts'in Dynasty established. It ruled with far more vigour and effect
than any previous family. The reign of Shi Hwang-ti (meaning "first universal
emperor") of this dynasty is usually taken to mark the end of feudal and
divided China. He seems to have played the unifying role in the east that
Alexander the Great might have played in the west, but he lived longer, and
the unity he made (or restored) was comparatively permanent, while the empire
of Alexander the Great fell to pieces, as we shall tell at his death. Shi
Hwang-ti, among other feats in the direction of common effort, organized the
building of the Great Wall of China against the Huns. A civil war followed
close upon his reign, and ended in the establishment of the Hun Dynasty.
Under this Hun Dynasty the empire grew greatly beyond its original two river
valleys, the Huns were effectively restrained, and the Chinese penetrated
westward until they began to learn at last, of civilized races and
civilizations other than their own.

By 100 B.C. the Chinese had heard of India, their power had spread across
Tibet and into Western Turkestan, and they were trading by camel caravans
with Persia and the western world. So much for the present must suffice for
our account of China. We shall return to the distinctive characters of its
civilization later.

.. [#fn12] :t:`China and the League of Nations`, a pamphlet by Mr. Liang-Chi-Chao. (Pekin Leader Office.)
