14.6 While the Civilizations were Growing
================================================================
And in these thousands of years during which man was making his way step by
step from the barbarism of the heliolithic culture to civilization at these
old-world centres, what was happening in the rest of the world? To the north
of these centres, from the Rhine to the Pacific, the Nordic and Mongolian
peoples, as we have told, were also learning the use of metals; but while the
civilizations were settling down these men of the great plains were becoming
migratory and developing from a slow wandering life towards a complete
seasonal nomadism. To the south of the civilized zone, in central and
southern Africa, the negro was making a slower progress, and that, it would
seem, under the stimulus of invasion by whiter tribes from the Mediterranean
regions, bringing with them in succession cultivation and the use of metals.
These white men came to the black by two routes: across the Sahara to the
west as Berbers and Tuaregs and the like, to mix with the negro and create
such quasi-white races as the Fulas; and also by way of the Nile, where the
Baganda (= Gandafolk) of Uganda, for example, may possibly be of remote white
origin. The African forests were denser then, and spread eastward and
northward from the Upper Nile.

The islands of the East Indies, three thousand years ago, were probably still
only inhabited here and there by stranded patches of Paleolithic Australoids,
who had wandered thither in those immemorial ages when there was a nearly
complete land bridge by way of the East Indies to Australia. The islands of
Oceania were uninhabited. The spreading of the heliolithic peoples by sea-
going canoes into the islands of the Pacific came much later in the history
of man, at earliest a thousand years B.C. Still later did they reach
Madagascar. The beauty of New Zealand also was as yet wasted upon mankind;
its highest living creatures were a great ostrich-like bird, the moa, now
extinct, and the little kiwi which has feathers like coarse hair and the
merest rudiments of wings.

In North America a group of Mongoloid tribes were now cut off altogether from
the old world. They were spreading slowly southward, hunting the innumerable
bison of the plains. They had still to learn for themselves the secrets of a
separate agriculture based on maize, and in South America to tame the lama to
their service, and so build up in Mexico and Peru two civilizations roughly
parallel in their nature to that of Sumer, but different in many respects,
and later by six or seven thousand years....

When men reached the southern extremity of America, the *Megatherium* the
giant sloth, and the *Glyptodon*, the giant armadillo, were still living.

There is a considerable imaginative appeal in the obscure story of the early
American civilizations. It was largely a separate development. Somewhen at
last the southward drift of the Amerindians must have met and mingled with
the eastward, canoe-borne drift of the heliolithic culture. But it was the
heliolithic culture still at a very lowly stage and probably before the use
of metals. It has to be noted as evidence of this canoe-borne, origin of
American culture, that elephant headed figures are found in Central American
drawings. American metallurgy may have arisen independently of the old world
use of metal, or it may have been brought by these elephant carvers. These
American peoples got to the use of bronze and copper, but not to the use of
iron; they had gold and silver; and their stonework, their pottery, weaving,
and dyeing were carried to a very high level. In all these things the
American product resembles the old-world product *generally*, but always it
has characteristics that are distinctive. The American civilizations had
picture-writing of a primitive sort, but it never developed even to the pitch
of the earliest Egyptian hieroglyphics. In Yucatan only, was there a kind of
script, the Maya writing, but it was used simply for keeping a calendar. In
Peru the beginnings of writing were superseded by a curious and complicated
method of keeping records by means of knots tied upon strings of various
colours and shapes. It is said that even laws and orders could be conveyed by
this code. These string bundles were called *quipus*, but though *quipus* are
still to be found in collections, the art of reading them is altogether lost.
The Chinese histories, Mr. L. Y. Chen informs us, state that a similar method
of record by knots was used in China before the invention of writing there.
The Peruvians also got to making maps and the use of counting frames. "But
with all this there was no means, of handing on knowledge and experience from
one generation to another, nor was anything done to fix and summarize these
intellectual possessions, which are the basis of literature and
science."\ [#fn13]_

When the Spaniards came to America, the Mexicans knew nothing of the
Peruvians nor the Peruvians of the Mexicans. Intercourse there was none.
Whatever links had ever existed were lost and forgotten. The Mexicans had
never heard of the potato which was a principal article of Peruvian diet. In
5,000 B.C. the Sumerians and Egyptians probably knew as little of one
another. American was 6,000 years behind the Old World.

.. [#fn13] F\. Ratzel, :t:`History of Mankind`.
