12.1 Is Mankind Still Differentiating?
================================================================
It is necessary now to discuss plainly what is meant by a phrase, used often
very carelessly, "The Races of Mankind".

It must be evident from what has already been explained in :doc:`Chapter 3 <../30-natural-selection-and-changes-of-species/30-natural-selection-and-changes-of-species>` that
man, so widely spread and subjected therefore to great differences of
climate, consuming very different food in different regions, attacked by
different enemies, must always have been undergoing considerable local
modification and differentiation. Man, like every other species of living
thing, has constantly been tending to differentiate into several species;
wherever a body of men has been cut off, in islands or oceans or by deserts
or mountains, from the rest of humanity, it must have begun very soon to
develop special characteristics, specially adapted to the local conditions.
But, on the other hand, man is usually a wandering and enterprising animal
for whom there exist few insurmountable barriers. Men imitate men, fight and
conquer them, interbreed, one people with another. Concurrently for thousands
of years there have been two sets of forces at work, one tending to separate
men into a multitude of local varieties, and another to remix and blend these
varieties together before a separate species has been established.

These two sets of forces may have fluctuated in this relative effect in the
past. Paleolithic man, for instance, may have been more of a wanderer, he may
have drifted about over a much greater area, than later Neolithic man; he was
less fixed to any sort of home or lair, he was tied by fewer possessions.
Being a hunter, he was obliged to follow the migrations of his ordinary
quarry. A few bad seasons may have shifted him hundreds of miles. He may
therefore have mixed very widely and developed few varieties over the greater
part of the world.

The appearance of agriculture tended to tie those communities of mankind that
took it up to the region in which it was most conveniently carried on, and so
to favour differentiation. Mixing or differentiation is not dependent upon a
higher or lower stage of civilization; many savage tribes wander now for
hundreds of miles; many English villagers in the eighteenth century, on the
other hand, had never been more than eight or ten miles from their villages,
neither they nor their fathers nor grandfathers before them. Hunting peoples
often have enormous range. The Labrador country, for instance, is inhabited
by a few thousand Indians, who follow the one great herd of caribou: as it
wanders yearly north and then south again in pursuit of food. This mere
handful of people covers a territory as large as France. Nomad peoples also
range very widely. Some Kalmuck tribes are said to travel nearly a thousand
miles between summer and winter pasture.

It carries out this suggestion, that Paleolithic man ranged widely and was
distributed thinly indeed but uniformly throughout the world, that the
Paleolithic remains we find are everywhere astonishingly uniform. To quote
`Sir John Evans <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Evans_(archaeologist)>`_, 

    The implements in distant lands are so identical in form
    and character with the British specimens that they might have been
    manufactured by the same hands. On the banks of the Nile, many hundreds of
    feet above its present level, implements of the European types have been
    discovered; while in Somaliland, in an ancient river-valley at a great
    elevation above the sea, Sir H. W. Seton-Karr has collected a large number of
    implements formed of flint and quartzite, which, judging from their form and
    character, might have been dug out of the drift deposits of the Somme and the
    Seine, the Thames or the ancient Solent.

Phases of spreading and intermixture have probably alternated with phases of
settlement and specialization in the history of mankind. But up to a few
hundred years ago it is probable that since the days of the Paleolithic Age
at least mankind has on the whole been differentiating. The species has
differentiated in that period into a very great number of varieties, many of
which have reblended with others, which have spread and undergone further
differentiation or become extinct. Wherever there has been a strongly marked
local difference of conditions and a check upon intermixture, there one is
almost obliged to assume a variety of mankind must have appeared. Of such
local varieties there must have been a great multitude.

In one remote corner of the world, Tasmania, a little cut-off population of
people remained in the early Paleolithic stage until the discovery of that
island by the Dutch in 1642. They are now, unhappily, extinct. The last
Tasmanian died in 1877. They may have been cut off from the rest of mankind
for 15,000 or 20,000 or 25,000 years.

But among the numerous obstacles and interruptions to intermixture there have
been certain main barriers, such as the Atlantic Ocean, the highlands, once
higher, and the now vanished seas of Central Asia and the like, which have
cut off great groups of varieties from other great groups of varieties over
long periods of time. These separated groups of varieties developed very
early certain broad resemblances and differences. Most of the varieties of
men in eastern Asia and America, but not all, have now this in common, that
they have yellowish buff skins, straight black hair, and often high cheek-
bones. Most of the native peoples of Africa south of the Sahara, but not all,
have black, or blackish skins, flat noses, thick lips, and frizzy hair. In
north and western Europe a great number of peoples have fair hair, blue eyes,
and ruddy complexions; and about the Mediterranean there is a prevalence of
white-skinned peoples with dark eyes and black hair. The black hair of many
of these dark whites is straight, but never so strong and waveless as the
hair of the yellow peoples. It is straighter in the east than in the west. In
southern India we find brownish and darker peoples with straight black hair,
and these as we pass eastward give place to more distinctly yellow peoples.
In scattered islands and in Papua and New Guinea we find another series of
black and brownish peoples of a more lowly type with frizzy hair.

But it must be borne in mind that these are very loose fitting
generalizations. Some of the areas and isolated pockets of mankind in the
Asiatic area may have been under conditions more like those in the European
area; some of the African areas are of a more Asiatic and less distinctively
African type. We find a wavy-haired, fairish, hairy-skinned race, the Ainu,
in Japan. They are more like the Europeans in their facial type than the
surrounding yellow Japanese. They may be a drifted patch of the whites or
they may be a quite distinct people. We find primitive black people in the
Andaman Islands far away from Australia and far away from Africa. There is a
streak of very Negroid blood traceable in south Persia and some parts of
India. These are the ?Asiatic? Negroid. There is little or no proof that all
black people, the Australians, the Asiatic Negroid, and the Negroes, derive
from one origin, but only that they have lived for vast periods under similar
conditions.

We must not assume that human beings in the eastern Asiatic area were all
differentiating in one direction and all the human beings in Africa in
another. There were great currents of tendency, it is true, but there were
also backwaters eddies, admixtures, readmixtures, and leakages from one main
area to the other. A coloured map of the world to show the races would not
present just four great areas of colour; it would have to be dabbed over with
a multitude of tints and intermediate shades, simple here, mixed and
overlapping there.

In the early Neolithic Period in Europe — it may be 10,000 or 12,000 years
ago or so — man was differentiating all over the world, and he had already
differentiated to a number of varieties, but he has never differentiated into
different *species*. A "species", we must remember, in biological language is
distinguished from a ?variety? by the fact that varieties can interbreed,
while species either do not do so or produce offspring which, like mules, are
sterile. All mankind can interbreed freely, can learn to understand the same
speech, can adapt itself to cooperation. And in the present age, man is
probably no longer undergoing differentiation at all. Readmixture is now a
far stronger force than differentiation. Men mingle more and more. Mankind
from the view of a biologist is an animal species in a state of arrested
differentiation and possible readmixture.

