12.2 The Main Races of Mankind
================================================================

.. _Figure 109:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0109.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0109.png
    :figclass: full-figure
    :width: 340px
    :alt: Figure 109

    Figure 109: Heads of Australoid Types

It is only in the last fifty or sixty years that the varieties of men came to
be regarded in this light, as a tangle of differentiations, recently arrested
or still in progress. Before that time students of mankind, influenced,
consciously or unconsciously, by the story of Noah and the Ark and his three
sons, Shem, Ham, and Japhet, were inclined to classify men into three or four
great races and they were disposed to regard these races as having always
been separate things, descended from originally separate ancestors. They
ignored the great possibilities of blended races and of special local
isolations and variations. The classification has varied considerably, but
there has been rather too much readiness to assume that mankind must be
completely divisible into three or four main groups. Ethnologists (students
of race) have fallen into grievous disputes about a multitude of minor
peoples, as to whether they were of this or that primary race or ?mixed?, or
strayed early forms, or what not. But all races are more or less mixed. There
are, no doubt, four main groups, but each is a miscellany, and there are
little groups that will not go into any of the four main divisions.

.. _Figure 112:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0112.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0112.png
    :figclass: full-figure
    :width: 340px
    :alt: Figure 112

    Figure 112: Negro Types

Subject to these reservations, when it is clearly understood that when we
speak of these main divisions we mean not simple and pure races, but groups
of races, then they have a certain convenience in discussion. Over the
European and Mediterranean area and western Asia there are, and have been for
many thousand years, white peoples, usually called the CAUCASIANS, subdivided
into two or three subdivisions, the northern blonds or Nordic race, an
alleged intermediate race about which many authorities are doubtful, the so-
called Alpine race, and the southern dark whites, the Mediterranean or
Iberian race; over eastern Asia and America a second group of races prevails,
the MONGOLIANS, generally with yellow skins, straight black hair, and sturdy
bodies; over Africa, the NEGROES, and in the region of Australia and New
Guinea the black, primitive AUSTRALOIDS. These are convenient terms, provided
the student bears in mind that they are not exactly defined terms. They
represent only the common characteristics of certain main groups of races;
they leave out a number of little peoples who belong properly to none of
these divisions, and they disregard the perpetual mixing where the main
groups overlap.


.. _Figure 113a:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0113a.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0113a.png
    :figclass: full-figure
    :width: 560px
    :alt: Figure 113a

    Figure 113a: Mongolian Types


.. _Figure 113b:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0113b.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0113b.png
    :figclass: full-figure
    :width: 560px
    :alt: Figure 113b

    Figure 113b: Caucasian Types

