
31.2 Life of Muhammad to the Hegira
========================================================================
It was in Mecca about the year A.D. 570 that Muhammad, the founder of Islam,
was born. He was born in considerable poverty, and even by the standards of the
desert he was uneducated; it is doubtful if he ever learnt to write. He was for
some years a shepherd's boy; then he became the servant of a certain Kadija, the
widow of a rich merchant. Probably he had to look after her camels or help in
her trading operations; and he is said to have travelled with caravans to the
Yemen and to Syria. He does not seem to have been a very useful trader, but he
had the good fortune to find favour in the lady's eyes, and she married him, to
the great annoyance of her family. He was then only twenty-five years old. It is
uncertain if his wife was much older, though tradition declares she was forty.
After the marriage he probably made no more long journeys. There were several
children, one of whom was named Abd Manif that is to say, the servant of the
Meccan god Manif, which demonstrates that at that time Muhammad had made no
religious discoveries.

Until he was forty he did indeed live a particularly undistinguished life in
Mecca, as the husband of a prosperous wife. There may be some ground for the
supposition that he became partner in a business in agricultural produce. To
anyone visiting Mecca about A.D. 600 he would probably have seemed something of
a loafer, a rather shy, good-looking individual, sitting about and listening to
talk, a poor poet, and an altogether second-rate man.

About his internal life we can only speculate. Imaginative writers have
supposed that he had great spiritual struggles that he went out into the desert
in agonies of doubt and divine desire. «In the silence of the desert night, in
the bright heat of noontide desert day, he, as do all men, had known and felt
himself alone yet not in solitude, for the desert is of God, and in the desert
no man may deny Him».\ [#fn1]_  may be that was so, but there is no evidence of any
such desert trips. Yet he was certainly thinking deeply of the things about him.
Possibly he had seen Christian churches in Syria; almost certainly he knew much
of the Jews and their religion, and he heard their scorn for this black, stone
of the Kaaba that ruled over the three hundred odd tribal gods of Arabia. He saw
the pilgrimage crowds, and noted the threads of insincerity and superstition in
the paganism of the town. It oppressed his mind. The Jews had perhaps converted
him to a belief in the One True God, without his knowing what had happened to
him.

At last he could keep these feelings to himself no longer. When he was forty
he began to talk about the reality of God, at first apparently only to his wife
and a few intimates. He produced certain verses, which he declared had been
revealed to him by an angel. They involved an assertion of the unity of God and
some acceptable generalizations about righteousness. He also insisted upon a
future life, the fear of hell for the negligent and evil, and the reservation of
paradise for the believer in the One God. Except for his claim to be a new
prophet, there does not seem to have been anything very new about these
doctrines at the time, but this was seditious teaching for Mecca, which partly
subsisted upon its polytheistic cult, and which was therefore holding on to
idols when all the rest of the world was giving them up.

Like Mani, Muhammad claimed that the prophets before him, and especially
Jesus and Abraham, had been divine teachers, but that he crowned and completed
their teaching. Buddhism, however, he did not name, probably because he had
never heard of Buddha. Desert Arabia was in a theological backwater.

For some years the new religion was the secret of a small group of simple
people, Kadija, the Prophet's wife, Ali, an adopted son, Zeid, a slave, and Abu
Bekr, a friend and admirer. For some years it was an obscure sect in a few
households of Mecca, a mere scowl and muttering at idolatry, so obscure and
unimportant that the leading men of the town did not trouble about it in the
least. Then it gathered strength. Muhammad began to preach more openly, to teach
the doctrine of a future life, and to threaten idolaters and unbelievers with
hell fire. He seems to have preached with considerable effect. It appeared to
many that he was aiming at a sort of dictatorship in Mecca, and drawing many
susceptible and discontented people to his side; and an attempt was made to
discourage and suppress the new movement.

Mecca was a place of pilgrimage and a sanctuary; no blood could be shed
within its walls; nevertheless, things, were made extremely disagreeable for the
followers of the new teacher. Boycott and confiscation were used against them.
Some were driven to take refuge in Christian Abyssinia. But the Prophet himself
went unscathed because he was well connected, and his opponents did not want to
begin a blood feud. We cannot follow the fluctuations of the struggle here, but
it is necessary to note one perplexing incident in the new Prophet's career,
which, says Sir Mark Sykes, «proves him to have been an Arab of the Arabs».
After all his insistence upon the oneness of God, he wavered. He came into the
courtyard of the Kaaba, and declared that the gods and goddesses of Mecca might,
after all, be real, might be a species of saints with a power of
intercession.

His recantation was received with enthusiasm, but he had no sooner made it
than he repented, and his repentance shows that he had indeed the fear of God in
him. His lapse from honesty proves him honest. He did all he could to repair the
evil he had done. He said that the devil had possessed his tongue, and denounced
idolatry again with renewed vigor. The struggle against the antiquated deities,
after a brief interval of peace, was renewed again more grimly, and with no
further hope of reconciliation.

For a time the old interests had the upper hand. At the end of ten years of
prophesying, Muhammad found himself a man of fifty, and altogether unsuccessful
in Mecca. Kadija, his first wife, was dead, and several of his chief supporters
had also recently died. He sought a refuge at the neighbouring town of Tayf, but
Tayf drove him out with stones and abuse. Then, when the world looked darkest to
him, opportunity opened before him. He found he had been weighed and approved in
an unexpected quarter. The city of Medina was much torn by internal dissension,
and many of its people, during the time of pilgrimage to Mecca, had been
attracted by Muhammad's teaching. Probably the numerous Jews in Medina had
shaken the ancient idolatry of the people. An invitation was sent to him to come
and rule in the name of his God in Medina.

He did not go at once. He parleyed for two years, sending a disciple to
preach in Medina and destroy the idols there. Then he began sending such
followers as he had in Mecca to Medina to wait his coming there; he did not want
to trust himself to unknown adherents in a strange city. This exodus of the
faithful continued, until at last only he and Abu Bekr remained.

In spite of the character of Mecca as a sanctuary, he was very nearly
murdered there. The elders of the town evidently knew of what was going on in
Medina, and they realized the danger to them if this seditious prophet presently
found himself master of a town on their main caravan route to Syria. Custom must
bow to imperative necessity, they thought; and they decided that, blood feud or
no blood feud, Muhammad must die. They arranged that he should be murdered in
his bed, and in order to share the guilt of this breach of sanctuary they
appointed a committee to do this, representing every family in the city except
Muhammad's own. But Muhammad had already prepared his flight; and when in the
night they rushed into his room, they found Ali, his adopted son, sleeping, or
feigning sleep, on his bed.

The flight (the Hegira) was an adventurous one, the pursuit being pressed
hard. Expert desert trackers sought for the spoor to the north of the town, but
Muhammad and Abu Bekr had gone south to certain eaves where camels and
provisions were hidden, and thence he made a great detour to Medina. There he
and his faithful companion arrived, and were received with great enthusiasm on
September 20, 622. It was the end of his probation and the beginning of his
power.

.. [#fn1] Mark Sykes
