
31.3 Muhammad becomes a Fighting Prophet
========================================================================
Until the Hegira until he was fifty-one, the character of the founder of
Islam is a matter of speculation and dispute. Thereafter he is in the light. We
discover a man of great imaginative power but tortuous in the Arab fashion, and
with most of the virtues and defects of the Bedouin.

The opening of his reign was «very Bedouin». The rule of the One God of all
the earth, as it was interpreted by Muhammad, began with a series of raids,
which for more than a year were invariably unsuccessful upon the caravans of
Mecca. Then came a grave scandal, the breaking of the ancient customary truce of
the Arab Amphictyony in the sacred month of Rahab. A party of Moslems, in this
season of profound peace, treacherously attacked a small caravan and killed a
man, it was their only success, and they did it by the order of the Prophet.

Presently came a battle. A force of seven hundred men had come out from Mecca
to convoy home another caravan, and they encountered a large raiding party of
three hundred. There was a fight, the battle of Badr, and the Meccans got the
worst of it. They lost about fifty or sixty killed and as many wounded. Muhammad
returned in triumph to Medina, and was inspired by Allah and this success to
order the assassination of a number of his opponents among the Jews in the town
who had treated his prophetic claims with a disagreeable levity.

But Mecca resolved to avenge Badr, and at the battle of Uhud, near Medina,
inflicted an indecisive defeat upon the Prophet's followers. Muhammad was
knocked down and nearly killed, and there was much running away among his
followers. The Meccans, however, did not push their advantage and enter
Medina.

For some time all the energies of the Prophet were concentrated upon rallying
his followers, who were evidently much dispirited. The Koran records the
chastened feelings of those days. «The suras of the Koran», says Sir Mark Sykes,
«which are attributed to this period, excel nearly all the others in their
majesty and sublime confidence». Here, for the judgment of the reader, is an
example of these majestic utterances, from the recent orthodox translation by
the Maulvi Muhammad Ali.\ [#fn2]_ 

«Oh, you who believe! If you obey those who disbelieve, they will turn you
back upon your heels, so you will turn back losers.

«Nay I Allah is your Patron, and He is the best of the helpers.

«We will cast terror into the hearts of those who disbelieve, because they
set up with Allah that for which he has sent down no authority, and their abode
is the fire; and evil is the abode of the unjust.

«And certainly Allah made good to you his promise, when you slew them by His
permission, until when you became weak hearted and disputed about the affair and
disobeyed after He had shown you that which you loved; of you were some who
desired this world, and of you were some who desired the hereafter; then He
turned you away from them that He might try you; and He has certainly pardoned
you, and Allah is Gracious to the believers.

«When you ran off precipitately, and did not wait for anyone, land the
Apostle was calling you from your rear, so He gave you another sorrow instead of
your sorrow, so that you might not grieve at what had escaped you, nor at what
befell you; and Allah is aware of what you do.

«Then after sorrow he sent down security upon you, a calm coming upon a party
of you, and there was another party whom their own souls had rendered anxious;
they entertained about Allah thoughts of ignorance quite unjustly, saying: We
have no hand in this affair. Say, surely the affair is wholly in the hands of
Allah. They conceal within their souls what they would not reveal to you. They
say: Had we any hand in the affair, we would not have been slain here. Say: had
you remained in your houses, those for whom slaughter was ordained would
certainly have gone forth to the places where they would be slain, and that
Allah might test what was in your breasts and that He might purge what was in
your hearts; and Allah knows what is in the breasts.

«As for those of you who turned back on the day when the two armies met, only
the devil sought to cause them to, make a slip on account of some deeds they had
done, and certainly Allah has pardoned them; surely Allah is Forgiving,
Forbearing».

Inconclusive hostilities continued for some years, and at last Mecca made a
crowning effort to stamp out for good and all the growing power of Medina. A
mixed force of no fewer than 10,000 men was scraped together, an enormous force
for the time and country. It was, of course, an entirely undisciplined force of
footmen, horsemen, and camel riders, and it was prepared for nothing but the
usual desert scrimmage. Bows, spears, and swords were its only weapons. When at
last it arrived amid a vast cloud of dust in sight of the hovels and houses of
Medina, instead of a smaller force of the same kind drawn up for battle, as it
had expected, it found a new and entirely disconcerting phenomenon, a trench and
a wall. Assisted by a Persian convert, Muhammad had entrenched himself in
Medina!

This trench struck the Bedouin miscellany as one of the most unsportsmanlike
things that had ever been known in the history of the world. They rode about the
place. They shouted their opinion of the whole business to the besieged. They
discharged a few arrows, and at last encamped to argue about this amazing
outrage. They could arrive at no decision. Muhammad would not come out; the
rains began to fall, the tents of the allies got wet and the cooking difficult,
views became came divergent and tempers gave way, and at last this great host
dwindled again into its constituent parts without ever having given battle
(627). The bands dispersed north, east, and south, became clouds of dust, and
ceased to matter. Near Medina was a castle of Jews, against whom Muhammad was
already incensed because of their disrespect or his theology. They had shown a
disposition to side with the probable victor in this last struggle, and Muhammad
now fell upon- them, slew all the men, nine hundred of them, and enslaved the
women and children. Possibly many of their late allies were among the bidders
for these slaves. Never again after this quaint failure did Mecca make an
effective rally against Muhammad, and one by one its leading men came over to
his side.

We need not follow the windings of the truce and the treaty that finally
extended the rule of the Prophet to Mecca. The gist of the agreement was that
the faithful should turn towards Mecca when they prayed instead of turning
towards Jerusalem as they had hitherto done, and that Mecca should be the
pilgrimage centre of the new faith. So long as the pilgrimage continued, the men
of Mecca, it would seem, did not care very much whether the crowd assembled in
the name of one god or many. Muhammad was getting more and more hopeless of any
extensive conversion of the Jews and Christians, and he was ceasing to press his
idea that all, these faiths really worshipped the same One God. Allah was
becoming more and more his own special God, tethered now by this treaty to the
meteoric stone of the Kaaba, and less and less the father of all mankind.
Already the Prophet had betrayed a disposition to make a deal with Mecca, and at
last it was effected. The lordship of Mecca was well worth the concession. Of
comings and goings and a final conflict we need not tell. In 629 Muhammad came
to the town as its master. The image of Manif, the god after whom he had once
named his son, was smashed under his feet as he entered the Kaaba.

Thereafter his power extended, there were battles, treacheries, massacres;
but on the whole he prevailed, until he was master of all Arabia; and when he
was master of all Arabia in 632, at the age of sixty-two, he died.

Throughout the concluding eleven years of his life after the Hegira, there is
little to distinguish the general conduct of Muhammad from that of any other
welder of peoples into a monarchy. The chief difference is his use of a religion
of his own creation as his cement. He was diplomatic, treacherous, ruthless, or
compromising as the occasion required and as any other Arab king might have been
in his place; and there was singularly little spirituality in his kingship. Nor
was his domestic life power and freedom one of exceptional edification. Until
the death of Kadija, when he was fifty, he seems to have been the honest husband
of one wife; but then, as many men do in their declining years, he developed a
disagreeably strong interest in women.

He married two wives after the death of Kadija, one being the young Ayesha,
who became and remained his favourite and most influential partner; and
subsequently a number of other women, wives and concubines, were added to his
establishment. This led to much trouble and confusion, and in spite of many
special and very helpful revelations on the part of Allah, these complications
still require much explanation and argument from the faithful. There was, for
example, a scandal about Ayesha; she was left behind on one occasion when the
howdah and the camel went on, while she was looking for her necklace among the
bushes; and so Allah had to intervene with some heat and denounce her
slanderers. Allah also had to speak very. plainly about the general craving
among this household of women for «this world's life and its ornature» and for
«finery». Then there was much discussion because the Prophet first married his
young cousin Zainib to his adopted son Zaid, and afterwards, «when Zaid had
accomplished his want of her», the Prophet took her and married her-but, as the
inspired book makes clear, only in order to show the difference between an
adopted and a real son. «We gave her to you as a wife, so that there should be
no difficulty for the believers in respect of the wives of their adopted sons,
when they have accomplished their want of them, and Allah's command shall be
performed». Yet surely a simple statement in the Koran should have sufficed
without this excessively practical demonstration. There was, moreover, a mutiny
in the harem on account of the undue favours shown by the Prophet to an Egyptian
concubine who had borne him a boy, a boy for whom he had a great affection,
since none of Kadija's sons had survived. These domestic troubles mingle
inextricably with our impression of the Prophet's personality. One of his wives
was a Jewess, Safiyya, whom he had married on the evening of the battle in which
her husband had been captured and executed. He viewed the captured women at the
end of the day, and she found favour in his eyes and was taken to his tent

These are salient facts in these last eleven years of Muhammad's career.
Because he, too, founded a great religion, there are those who write of this
evidently lustful and rather shifty leader as though he were a man to put beside
Jesus of Nazareth or Gautama or Mani. But it is surely manifest that he was a
being of a commoner clay; he was vain egotistical, tyrannous, and a
self-deceiver; and it would throw all our history out of proportion if, out of
an insincere deference to the possible Moslem reader, we were to present him in
any other light.

Yet, unless we balance it, this insistence upon his vanity, egotism,
self-deception, and hot desire does net complete the justice of the case. We
must not swing across from the repudiation of the extravagant pretensions of the
faithful to an equally extravagant condemnation. Can a man who has no good
qualities hold a friend? Because those who knew Muhammad best believed in him
most. Kadija for all her days believed in him -but she may have been a fond
woman. Abu Bekr is a better witness, and he never wavered in his devotion. Abu
Bekr believed in the Prophet, and it is very hard for anyone who reads the
history of these times not to believe in Abu Bekr. Ali again risked his life for
the Prophet in his darkest days. Muhammad was no impostor, at any rate, though
at times his vanity made him behave as though Allah was at his beck and call,
and as if his thoughts were necessarily God's thoughts. And if his bloodstained
passion with Safiyya amazes and disgusts our modern minds, his love for little
Ibrahim, the son of Mary the Egyptian, and his passionate grief when the child
died, reinstate him in the fellowship of all those who have known love and
loss.

He smoothed the earth over the little grave with his own hands. «This eases
the afflicted heart», he said. «Though it neither profits nor injures the dead,
yet it is a comfort to the living».

.. [#fn2] Published by the :t:`Islamic Review`
