
31.4 The Teachings of Islam
========================================================================
But the personal quality of Muhammad is one thing and the quality of Islam,
the religion he founded is another. Muhammad was not pitted against Jesus or
Mani, and relative stature is only a very secondary question for us; it is
Islam, which was pitted against the corrupted Christianity of the seventh
century and against the decaying tradition of the Zoroastrian Magi with which
the historian has the greater concern. And whether it was through its Prophet or
whether it was in spite of its Prophet, and through certain accidents in its
origin and certain qualities of the desert from which it sprang, there can be no
denying that Islam possesses many fine and noble attributes. It is not always
through sublime persons that great things come into human life. It is the folly
of the simple disciple, which demands miraculous frippery on the majesty of
truth and immaculate conceptions for righteousness.

A year before his death, at the end of the tenth year of the Hegira, Muhammad
made his last pilgrimage from Medina to Mecca. He made then a great sermon to
his people of which the tradition is as follows. There are, of course, disputes
as to the authenticity of the words, but there can be no dispute that the world
of Islam, a world still of three hundred million people, receives them to this
day as its rule of life, and to a great extent observes it. The reader will note
that the first paragraph sweeps away all plunder and blood feuds among the
followers of Islam. The last makes the believing Negro the equal of the Caliph.
They may not be sublime words, as certain utterances of Jesus of Nazareth are
sublime; but they established in the world a great tradition of dignified fair
dealing, they breathe a spirit of generosity, and they are human and workable.
They created a society more free from widespread cruelty and social oppression
than any society had ever been in the world before.

«Ye people: Hearken to my words; for I know not whether, after this year, I
shall ever be amongst you here again. Your lives and property are sacred and
inviolable amongst one another until the end of time.

«The Lord hath ordained to every man the share of his inheritance; a
testament is not lawful to the prejudice of heirs.

«The child belongeth to the parent; and the violator of wedlock shall be
stoned.

«Whoever claimeth falsely another for his father, or another for his master,
the curse of God and the angels and of all mankind shall rest upon him.

«Ye people! Ye have rights demandable of your wives, and they have rights
demandable of you. Upon them it is incumbent not to violate their conjugal faith
nor commit any act of open impropriety; which things if they do, ye have
authority to shut them up in separate apartments and to beat them with stripes,
yet not severely. But if they refrain there from, clothe them and feed them
suitably. And treat your women well, for they are with you as captives and
prisoners; they have not power over anything as regards themselves. And ye have
verily taken them on the security of God, and have made their persons lawful
unto you by the words of God.

«And your slaves, see that ye feed them with such food as ye eat yourselves,
and clothe them with the stuff ye wear. And if they commit a fault which ye are
not inclined to forgive, then sell them, for they are the servants of the Lord,
and are not to be tormented.

«Ye people! hearken to my speech and comprehend the same. Know that every
Moslem is the brother of every other Moslem. All of you are on the same
equality».

This insistence upon kindliness and consideration in the daily life is one of
the main virtues Islam, but it is not the only one. Equally important is
uncompromising monotheism, void of any- Jewish exclusiveness, which is sustained
by the Koran. Islam from the outset was fairly proof against the theological
elaborations that have perplexed and divided Christianity and smothered the
spirit of Jesus. And its third source of strength has been in the meticulous,
prescription of methods of prayer and worship and its clear statement of the
limited and conventional significance of the importance ascribed to Mecca. All
sacrifice was barred to the faithful; no loophole was left for the sacrificial
priest of the old dispensation to come back into the new faith. It was not
simply a new faith, a purely prophetic religion, as the religion of Jesus was in
the time of Jesus, or the religion of Gautama in the lifetime of Gautama, but it
was so stated as to remain so. Islam to this day has learned doctors, teachers
and preachers; but it has no priests.

It was full of the spirit of kindliness, generosity and brotherhood; it was a
simple and understandable religion; it was instinct with the chivalrous
sentiment of the desert; and it made its appeal straight to the commonest
instincts in the composition of ordinary men. Against it were pitted Judaism,
which had made a racial hoard of God; Christianity talking and preaching
endlessly now of trinities, doctrines, and heresies no ordinary man could make
head or tail of; and Mazdaism, the cult of the Zoroastrian Magi, who had
inspired the crucifixion of Mani. The bulk of the people to whom the challenge
of Islam came did not trouble very much whether Muhammad was lustful or not, or
whether he had done some shifty and questionable things; what appealed to them
was that this God, Allah, he preached, was by the test of the conscience in
their hearts a God of righteousness, and that the honest acceptance of his
doctrine and method opened the door wide in a world of uncertainty, treachery,
and intolerable divisions to a great and increasing brotherhood of, trustworthy
men on earth, and to a paradise not of perpetual exercises in praise and
worship, in which saints, priests, and anointed kings were still to have the
upper places, but of equal fellowship and simple and understandable delights
such as their souls craved for. Without any ambiguous symbolism, without any
darkening of altars or chanting of priests, Muhammad had brought home those
attractive doctrines to the hearts of mankind.

