
31.5 The Caliphs Abu Bekr, Omar
========================================================================
The true embodiment of the spirit of Islam was not Muhammad, but his close
friend and supporter, Abu Bekr. There can be little doubt that if Muhammad was
the mind and imagination of primitive Islam, Abu Bekr was its conscience and its
will. Throughout their life together it was Muhammad who said the thing, but it
was Abu Bekr who believed the thing. When Muhammad wavered, Abu Bekr sustained
him. Abu Bekr was a man without doubts, his beliefs cut down to acts cleanly as
a sharp knife cuts. We may feel sure that Abu Bekr would never have temporized
about the minor gods of Mecca, or needed inspirations from Allah to explain his
private life. When in the eleventh year of the Hegira (632) the Prophet sickened
of a fever and died, it was Abu Bakr who succeeded him as Caliph and leader of
the people (Kalifa Successor), -and it was the unflinching confidence of Abu
Bekr in the righteousness of Allah which prevented a split between Medina and
Mecca, which stamped down a widespread insurrection of the Bedouin against
taxation for the common cause, and carried out a great plundering raid into
Syria that the dead Prophet had projected. And then Abu Bekr, with that faith
which moves mountains, set himself simply and sanely to organize the subjugation
of the whole world to Allah-with little armies of 3,000 or 4,000 Arabs-according
to those letters the Prophet had written from Medina in 628 to all the monarchs
of the world.

And the attempt came near to succeeding. Had there been in Islam a score of
men, younger men to carry on his work, of Abu Bekr's quality, it would certainly
have succeeded. It came near to succeeding because Arabia was now a centre of
faith and will, and because nowhere else in the world until China was reached,
unless it was upon the steppes of Russia or Turkestan, was there another
community of free-spirited men with any power of belief in their rulers and
leaders. The head of the Byzantine Empire, Heraclius, the conqueror of Chosroes
11, was past his prime and suffering from dropsy, and his empire was exhausted
by the long Persian war. Nor had he at any time displayed such exceptional
ability as the new occasion demanded.

.. _Figure 583:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0583.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0583.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 583

    Figure 583: Map â€” Beginnings of Moslem Power

The motley of people under his rule knows little of him and eared less.
Persia was at the lowest depths of monarchist degradation, the parricide Kavadh
II had died after a reign of a few months, and a series- of dynastic intrigues
and romantic murders enlivened the -palace but weakened the country. The war
between Persia and the Byzantine Empire was only formally concluded about the
time of the beginning of Abu Bekr's rule. Both sides had made great use of Arab
auxiliaries; over Syria a number of towns and settlements of Christianized Arabs
were scattered who professed a baseless loyalty to Constantinople; the Persian
marches between Mesopotamia and the desert were under the control of an Arab
tributary prince, whose capital was at Hira. Arab influence was strong in such
cities as Damascus, where Christian Arab gentlemen would read and recite the
latest poetry from the desert competitors. There was thus a great amount of
easily assimilable material ready at hand for Islam.

And the military campaigns that now began were among the most brilliant in
the world's history. Arabia had suddenly became a garden of fine men. The name
of Khalid stands out as the brightest star in a constellation of able and
devoted Moslem generals. Whenever he commanded he was victorious, and when the
jealousy of the second Caliph, Omar, degraded him unjustly and inexcusably,\ [#fn3]_ 
he made no ado, but served Allah cheerfully and well as a subordinate to those
over whom he had ruled. We cannot trace the story of this warfare here; the Arab
armies struck simultaneously at Byzantine Syria and the Persian frontier city of
Hira, and everywhere they offered a choice of three alternatives: either pay
tribute, or confess the true God and join us, or die. They encountered armies,
large and disciplined but spiritless armies, and defeated them. And nowhere was
there such a thing as a popular resistance. The people of the populous
irrigation lands of Mesopotamia cared not a jot whether they paid taxes to
Byzantium or Persepolis or to Medina; and of the two, Arabs or Persian court,
the Arabs, the Arabs of the great years, were manifestly the cleaner people,
more just and more merciful. The Christian Arabs joined the invaders very
readily and so did many Jews. Just as in the west, so now in the east, an
invasion became a social revolution. But here it was also a religious revolution
with a new and distinctive mental vitality.

It was Khalid who fought the decisive battle (634) with the army of Heraclius
upon the banks of the Yarmuk, a tributary of the Jordan. The legions, as ever,
were without proper cavalry; for seven centuries the ghost of old Crassus had
haunted the east in vain; the imperial armies relied upon Christian Arab
auxiliaries, and these deserted to the Moslems as the armies joined issue.

A great parade of priests, sacred banners, pictures, and holy relics was made
by the Byzantine host, and it was further sustained by the chanting of monks.
But there was -no magic in the relics and little conviction about the chanting.
On the Arab side of the emirs and sheiks harangued the troops and after the
ancient Arab fashion the shrill voices of women in the rear encouraged their
men. The Moslem ranks were full of believers before whom shone victory or
paradise. The battle was never in doubt after the defection of the irregular
cavalry. An attempt to retreat dissolved into a rout and became a massacre. The
Byzantine army had fought with its back to the river, which was presently choked
with its dead.

Thereafter Heraclius slowly relinquished all Syria, which he lately won back
from the Persians, to his new antagonists. Damascus soon fell, and a year later
the Moslems entered Antioch. For a time they had to abandon it again to a last
effort from Constantinople, but they re-entered it for good under Khalid.

Meanwhile on the eastern front, after a swift initial success, which gave
them Hira, the Persian resistance stiffened. The dynastic struggle had ended at
last in the coming of a king of kings, and a general of ability had been found
in Rustam. He gave battle at Kadessia (637). His army was just such another
composite host as Darius had led into Thrace or Alexander defeated at Issus; it
was a medley of levies. He had thirty-three war elephants, and he sat on a
golden throne upon a raised platform behind the Persian ranks, surveying the
battle, which throne will remind the reader of Herodotus, the Hellespont, and
Salamis more than a thousand years before. The battle lasted three days; each
day the Arabs attacked and the Persian host held its ground until nightfall
called a truce. On the third day the Arabs received reinforcements, and towards
the evening the Persians attempted to bring the struggle to an end by a charge
of elephants. At first the huge beasts carried all before them; then one was
wounded painfully and became uncontrollable, rushing up and down between the
armies. Its panic affected the others, and for a time both armies remained
dumbfounded in the red light of sunset, watching the frantic efforts of these
grey, squealing monsters, to escape from the tormenting masses of armed men that
hemmed them in. It was by the merest chance that at last they broke through the
Persian and not through the Arab array, and that it was the Arabs who were able
to charge home upon the resulting confusion. The twilight darkened to night, but
this time the armies did not separate. All through the night the Arabs smote in
the name of Allah, and pressed upon the shattered and retreating Persians. Dawn
broke upon the vestiges of Rustam's army in flight far beyond the litter of the
battlefield. Its path was marked by scattered weapons and war material,
abandoned transport, and the dead and dying. The platform and the golden throne
were broken down, and Rustam lay dead among a heap of dead men . . .

Already in 634 Abu Bekr had died and given place to Omar, the Prophet's
brother-in-law, as Caliph; and it was under Omar (634-643) that the main
conquests of the Moslems occurred. The Bysantine Empire was pushed out of Syria
altogether. But at the Taurus Mountains the Moslem thrust was held. Armenia was
overrun, all Mesopotamia was conquered and Persia beyond the rivers. Egypt
passed almost passively from Greek to Arab; in a few years the Semitic race, in
the name of God and His Prophet, had recovered nearly all the dominions it had
lost to the Aryan Persians a thousand years before. Jerusalem fell early, making
a treaty without standing siege, and so the True Cross which had been carried
off by the Persians a dozen years before, and elaborately restored by Heraclius,
passed once more out of the rule of Christians. But it was still in Christian
hands; the Christians were to be tolerated, paying only a poll tax; and all the
churches and all the relics were left in their possession.

.. _Figure 587:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0587.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0587.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 587

    Figure 587: Growth of Moslem power in 25 years

Jerusalem made a peculiar condition for its surrender. The city would give
itself only to the Caliph Omar in person. Hitherto he had been in Medina
organizing armies and controlling the general campaign. He came to Jerusalem
(638), and the manner of his coming shows how swiftly the vigour and simplicity
of the first Moslem onset was being sapped by success. He came the six-
hundred-mile journey with only one attendant; he was mounted on a camel, and a
bag of barley, another of dates, a water-skin, and a wooden platter were his
provision for the journey. He was met outside the city by his chief captains,
robed splendidly in silks and with richly caparisoned horses.

At this amazing sight the old man was overcome with rage. He slipped down
from his saddle, scrabbled up dirt and stones with his hands, and pelted these
fine gentlemen, shouting abuse. What was this insult? What did this finery mean?
Where were his warriors? Where were the, desert men? He would -not let these
popinjays escort him. He went on with his attendant, and the smart Emirs rode
afar off well out of range of his stones. He met the Patriarch of Jerusalem, who
had apparently taken over the city from its Byzantine rulers, alone. With the
Patriarch he got on very well. They went round the Holy Places together, and
Omar, now a little appeased, made sly jokes at the expense of his too
magnificent followers.

Equally indicative of the tendencies of the time is Omar's letter ordering
one of his governors who had built himself a palace at Kufa, to demolish it
again.

Â«They tell meÂ», he wrote, Â«you would imitate the palace of Chosroes,\ [#fn4]_  and
that you would even use the gates that once were his. Will you also have guards
and porters at those gates, as Chosroes had? Will you keep the faithful afar off
and deny audience to the poor? Would you depart from the custom of our Prophet,
and be as magnificent as those Persian emperors, and descend to hell even as
they have done?Â»\ [#fn5]_ 

.. [#fn3] But Schurtz, in Helmholtâ€™s :t:`History of the World`, says that the private life of the gallant Khalid was a scandal to the faithful. He committed adultery, a serious offense in a world of polygamy.

.. [#fn4] At Ctesiphon

.. [#fn5] Paraphrased from Schurtz in Helmholtâ€™s :t:`History of the World`.
