
31.6 The Great Days of the Omayyads
========================================================================
Abu Bekr and Omar I are the two-master figures in the history of Islam. It is
not within our scope here to describe the wars by which in a hundred and
twenty-five years Islam spread itself from the Indus to the Atlantic and Spain
and from Kashgar on the borders of China to Upper Egypt. Two maps must suffice
to show the limits to which the vigorous impulse of the new faith carried the
Arab idea and the Arabic scriptures, before worldliness, the old trading and
plundering spirit, and the glamour of the silk robe had completely recovered
their paralyzing sway over the Arab intelligence and will. The reader will note
how the great tide swept over the footsteps of Yuan Ghwang, and how easily in
Africa the easy conquests of the Vandals were repeated in the reverse
direction.

And if the reader entertains any delusions about a fine civilization, either
Persian, Roman, Hellenic, or Egyptian, being submerged by this flood, the sooner
he dismisses such ideas the better. Islam prevailed because it was the best
social and political order the times could offer. It prevailed because
everywhere it found politically apathetic peoples, robbed, oppressed, bullied,
uneducated, and unorganized, and it found selfish and unsound governments out of
touch with any people at all. It was the broadest, freshest, and cleanest
political idea that had yet come into actual activity in the world, and it
offered better terms than any other to the mass of mankind. The capitalistic and
slave holding system of the Roman Empire and the literature and culture and
social tradition of Europe had altogether decayed and broken down before Islam
arose, it was only when man kind lost faith in the sincerity of its
-representatives that Islam, too, began to decay.

The larger part of its energy spent itself in conquering and assimilating
Persia and Turkestan; its most vigorous thrusts were northwardly from Persia and
westwardly through Egypt. Had it concentrated its first vigour upon the
Byzantine Empire, there can be little doubt that by the eighth century it would
have taken Constantinople and come through into Europe as easily as it reached
the Pamirs. The Caliph Muawiya, it is true, besieged the capital for seven years
(672 to 678), and Suleiman in 717 and 718; but the pressure was not sustained,
and for three or four centuries longer the Byzantine Empire remained the crazy
bulwark of Europe. In the newly Christianized or still pagan Avars, Bulgars,
Serbs, Slavs, and Saxons, Islam would certainly have found as ready converts as
it did in the Turks of Central Asia. And though, instead of insisting upon
Constantinople, it first came -round into Europe by the circuitous route of
Africa and Spain, it was only in France, at the end of a vast line of
communications from Arabia, that it encountered a power sufficiently vigorous to
arrest its advance.

From the outset the Bedouin aristocrats of Mecca, dominated the new empire.
Abu Bekr, the first Caliph, was in an informal shouting way elected at Medina,
and so were Omar I and Othman, the third Caliph, but all three were Meccans of
good family. They were not men of Medina. And though Abu Bekr and Omar were men
of stark simplicity and righteousness Othman was of a baser quality, a man quite
in the vein of those silk robes, to whom conquest was not conquest for Allah but
for Arabia, and especially for Mecca in Arabia, and more particularly for
himself and for the Meccans and for his family, the Omayyads.

.. _Figure 590:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0590.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0590.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 590

    Figure 590: The Moslem Empire, 750 A.D.

He was a worthy man, who stood out for his country and his town and his
«people». He was no early convert as his two predecessors had been; he had
joined the Prophet for reasons of policy in fair give and take. With his
accession the Caliph ceases to be a strange man of fire and wonder, and becomes
an Oriental monarch like many Oriental monarchs before and since, a fairly good
monarch by Eastern standards as yet, but nothing more.

The rule and death of Othman brought out the consequences of Muhammad's
weaknesses as clearly as the lives of Abu Bekr and Omar had witnessed to the
divine -fire in his teaching. Muhammad had been politic at times when Abu Bekr
would have been firm, and the new element of aristocratic greediness that came
in with Othman was one fruit of those politic moments. And the legacy of that
carelessly compiled harem of the Prophet, the family complications and
jealousies which had lurked in the background of Moslem affairs during the rule
of the first two Caliphs, was now coming out into the light of day. Ali, who was
the nephew, the adopted son, and the son-in-law of the Prophet -he was the
husband of the Prophet's daughter Fatima- he had considered himself the rightful
Caliph. His claims formed an undertow to the resentment of Medina and of the
rival families of Mecca against the advancement of the Omayyads. But Ayesha, the
favourite wife of the Prophet, had always been jealous of Fatima and hostile to
Ali. She supported Othman . . . The splendid opening of the story of Islam
collapses suddenly into this squalid dispute and bickering of heirs and
widows.

In 656 Othman, an old man of eighty, was stoned in the streets of Medina by a
mob, chased to his house, and murdered; and Ali became at last Caliph, only to
be murdered in his turn (661). In one of the battles in this civil war, Ayesha,
now a gallant, mischievous old lady, distinguished herself by leading a charge,
mounted on a camel. She was taken prisoner and treated well.

While the armies of Islam were advancing triumphantly to the conquest of the
world, this sickness of civil war smote at its head. What was the rule of Allah
in the world to Ayesha when she could score off the detested Fatima, and what
heed were the Omayyads and the partisans of Ali likely to take of the unity of
mankind when they had a good hot feud of this sort to entertain them, with the
caliphate as a prize? The world of Islam was rent in twain by the spites,
greeds, and partisan silliness of a handful of men and women in Medina. That
quarrel still lives. To this day one main division of the Moslems, the Shiites,
maintain the hereditary right of Ali to be Caliph as an article of faith! They
prevail in Persia and India. But an equally important section, the Sunnites,
with whom it is difficult for a disinterested observer not to agree, deny this
peculiar addendum to Muhammad's simple creed. So far as we can gather at this
length of time, Ali was an entirely commonplace individual.

To watch this schism creeping across the brave beginnings of Islam is like
watching a case of softening of the brain. To the copious literature of the
subject we must refer, the reader who wishes to learn how Hasan, the son of Ali,
was poisoned by his wife, and how Husein, his brother, was killed. We do but
name them here because they still afford a large section of mankind scope for
sentimental partisanship and mutual annoyance. They are the two chief Shiite
martyrs. Amidst the coming and going of their conflicts the old Kaaba at Mecca
was burnt down, and naturally there began endless disputation whether it should
be rebuilt in exactly its ancient form or on a much larger scale.

In this and the preceding sections we have seen once more the inevitable
struggle of this newest, and latest unifying impulse in the world's affairs
against the everyday worldliness of mankind, and we have seen also how from the
first the complicated household of Muhammad was like an evil legacy -to the new
faith. But as this history now degenerates into the normal crimes and intrigues
of an Oriental dynasty, the Student of history will realize a third fundamental
weakness in the world reforms of Muhammad. He was an illiterate Arab, ignorant
of history, totally ignorant of all the political experiences of Rome and
Greece, and almost as ignorant of the real history of Judea; and he left his
followers with no scheme for a stable government embodying and concentrating the
general will of the faithful, and no effective form to express the very real
spirit of democracy (using the world in its modern souse) that pervades the
essential teaching of Islam. His own rule was unlimited autocracy, and
autocratic Islam has remained. Politically Islam was not an advance, but a
retrogression from the traditional freedoms and customary laws of the desert.
The breach of the pilgrims' truce that led to the battle of Badr is the blackest
mark against early Islam. Nominally Allah is its chief ruler-but practically its
Master has always been whatever man was vigorous and unscrupulous enough to
snatch and hold the Caliphate and, subject to revolts and assassinations, its
final law has been that man's will.

For a time, after the death of Ali, the Omayyad family was in the ascendant,
and for nearly a century they gave rulers to Islam.

The Arab historians are so occupied with the dynastic squabbles and crimes of
the time, that it is difficult to trace the external history of the period. We
find Moslem shipping upon the seas defeating the Byzantine fleet in a great sea
fight off the coast of Lycia (A.D. 655), but how the Moslems acquired this
victorious fleet thus early we do not clearly know. It was probably chiefly
Egyptian. For some years Islam certainly controlled the eastern Mediterranean,
and in 662 and again in 672, during the reign of Muawiya (662-680), the first
great Omayyad Caliph, made two sea attacks upon Constantinople. They had to be
sea attacks because Islam, so long as it was under Arab rule, never surmounted
the barrier of the Taurus Mountains. During the same period the Moslems were
also pressing their conquests further and further into Central Asia. While Islam
was already decaying at its centre, it was yet making great hosts of new
adherents and awakening a new spirit among the hitherto divided and aimless
Turkish peoples. Medina was no longer a possible centre for its vast enterprises
in Asia, Africa, and the Mediterranean, and so Damascus became the usual capital
of the Omayyad Caliphs.

Chief among these, as for a time the clouds of dynastic intrigue clear, are
Abdal Malik (685-705) and Walid I (705-715), under whom the Omayyad line rose to
the climax of its successes. The western boundary was carried to the Pyrenees,
while to the east the domains of the Caliph marched with China. The son of
Walid, Suleiman (715), carried out a second series of Moslem attacks upon
Constantinople, which his father had planned and proposed. As with the Caliph
Muawiya half a century before, the approach was by sea—for Asia Minor, as we
have just noted, was still unconquered—and the shipping was drawn chiefly from
Egypt. The emperor, a usurper, Leo the Isaurian, displayed extraordinary skill
and obstinacy in the defence; he burnt most of the Moslem shipping in a
brilliant sortie, cut up the troops they had landed upon the Asiatic side of the
Bosphorus, and after a campaign in Europe of two years a winter of unexampled
severity completed their defeat.

From this point onward the glory of the Omayyad line decays. The first
tremendous impulse of Islam was now spent. There was no further expansion and a
manifest decline in religious zeal. Islam had made millions of converts, and had
digested those millions very imperfectly. Cities, nations, whole sects and
races, Arab pagans, Jews, Christians, Manichaeans, Zoroastrians, Turanian pagans
had been Swallowed up into this new vast empire of Muhammad's successors. It has
hitherto been the common characteristic of all the great unifying religious
initiators of the world, the common oversight, that they have accepted the moral
and theological ideals to which the first appeal was made, as though they were
universal ideals. Muhammad's appeal, for example, was to the traditional
chivalry and underlying monotheistic feelings of the intelligent Arabs of his
time. These things were latent in the mind and conscience of Mecca and Medina;
he did but calls them forth. Then, as the new teaching spread and stereotyped
itself, it had to work on a continually more uncongenial basis, it had to grow
in soil that distorted and perverted it. Its sole textbook was the Koran. To
minds untuned to the melodies of Arabic, this book seemed to be, as it seems to
many European minds today, a mixture of fine spirited rhetoric with to put it,
plainly formless and unintelligent gabble. Countless converts missed the real
thing in it altogether. To that we must ascribe the readiness of the Persian and
Indian sections of the faith to join the Shiite schism upon a quarrel that they
could at least understand and feel. And to the same attempt to square the new
stuff with old prepossessions, was due such extravagant theology as presently
disputed whether the Koran was and always had been co-existent with God.\ [#fn6]_  We
should be stupefied by the preposterousness of this idea if we did not recognize
in it at once the well-meaning attempt of some learned Christian convert to
Islamize his belief that «In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with
God, and the Word was God».\ [#fn7]_ 

None of the great unifying religious initiators of the world hitherto seems
to have been accompanied by any understanding of the vast educational task, the
vast work of lucid and varied exposition and intellectual organization involved
in its propositions. They all present the same history of a rapid spreading,
like a little water poured over a great area, and then of a superficiality and
corruption.

In a little while we hear stories of an Omayyad Caliph, Walid II (743-744),
who mocked at the Koran, ate pork, drank wine, and did not pray. Those stories
may have been true or they may have been circulated for political reasons. There
began a puritan reaction in Mecca and Medina against the levity and luxury of
Damascus. Another great Arab family, the Abbas family, the Abbasids, a
thoroughly wicked line, had long been scheming for power, and was making capital
out of the general discontent. The feud of the Omayyads and the Abbasids was
older than Islam; it had been going on before Muhammad was born. These Abbasids
took up the tradition of the Shiite «martyrs», Ali and his sons Hasan and
Husein, and identified themselves with it. The banner of the Omayyads was white;
the Abbasid adopted a black banner, black in mourning for Hasan and Husein,
black because black is more impressive than any colour; moreover, the Abbasids
declared that all the Caliphs after Ali were usurpers. In 749 they accomplished
a carefully prepared revolution, and the last of the Omayyad Caliphs was hunted
down and slain in Egypt. Abul Abbas was the first of the Abbasid Caliphs, and he
began his reign by collecting into one prison every living male of the Omayyad
line upon whom he could lay hands and causing them all to be massacred. Their
bodies, it is said, were heaped together, a leathern carpet was spread over
them, and, on this gruesome table Abul Abbas and his councilors feasted.
Moreover, the tombs of the Omayyad Caliphs were rifled, and their bones burnt
and scattered to the four winds of heaven. So the grievances of Ali were avenged
at last, and the Omayyad line passed out of history.

There was, it is interesting to note, a rising on behalf of the Omayyads in
Khorasan which was assisted by the Chinese Emperor.

.. [#fn6] Mark Sykes

.. [#fn7] St. John’s Gospel, chap i. 1.
