
31.7 The Decay of Islam under Abbasids
========================================================================
But the descendants of Ali were not, destined to share in this triumph for
long. The Abassids were adventurers and rulers of an older school than Islam.
Now that the tradition of Ali had served its purpose, the next proceeding of the
new Caliph was to hunt down and slaughter the surviving members of his, family,
the descendants of Ali and Fatima.

Clearly the old traditions of Sassanid Persia and of Persia before the Greeks
were returning to the world. With the accession of the Abbasids the control of
the sea departed from the Caliph, and with it went Spain and North Africa, in
which, under an Omayyad survivor in the former case, independent Moslem states
now arose. The centre of gravity of Islam shifted across the desert from
Damascus to Mesopotamia. Mansur, the successor of Abul Abbas, built himself a
new capital at Bagdad near the ruins of Ctesiphon, the former Sassanid capital.
Turks and Persians as well as Arabs became Emirs, and the army was reorganized
upon Sassanid lines. Medina and Mecca were now only of importance as pilgrimage
centres, to which the faithful turned to pray. But because it was a fine
language, and because it was the language of the Koran, Arabic continued to
spread until presently it had -replaced Greek and become the language of
educated men throughout the whole Moslem world.

Of the Abbasid monarchs after Abul Abbas we need tell little here. A
bickering war went on year by year in Asia Minor in which neither Byzantium nor
Bagdad made any permanent gains, though once or twice the Moslems raided as far
as the Bosphorus. A false prophet Mokanna, who said he was God, had a brief but
troublesome career. There were plots, there were insurrections; they lie flat
and colourless now in the histories like dead flowers in an old book. One other
Abbasid Caliph only need be named, and that quite as much for his legendary as
for his real importance, Haroun-al-Raschid (786-809). He was not only the Caliph
of an outwardly prosperous empire in the world of reality, but he was also the
Caliph of an undying empire in the deathless world of fiction, he was the
Haroun-al-Raschid of the *Arabian Nights.*

Sir Mark Sykes\ [#fn8]_  gives an account of the reality of his empire from which
we will quote certain passages. He says: «The Imperial Court was polished,
luxurious, and unlimitedly wealthy; the capital, Bagdad, a gigantic mercantile
city surrounding a huge administrative fortress, wherein every department of
state had a, properly regulated and well-ordered public office; where schools
and colleges abounded; whither philosophers, students, doctors, poets, and
theologians flocked from all parts of the civilized globe . . . The provincial
capitals were embellished with vast public buildings, and linked together by an
effective and rapid service of posts and caravans; the frontiers were secure and
well garrisoned, the army loyal, efficient, and brave; the governors and
ministers honest and forbearing. The empire stretched with equal strength and
unimpaired control from the Cilician Gates to Aden, and -from Egypt to Central
Asia. Christians, Pagans, Jews, as well as Moslems, were employed in the
government service. Usurpers, rebellious generals, and false prophets seemed to
have vanished from the Moslem dominions. Traffic and wealth had taken the place
of revolution and famine . . . Pestilence and disease were met by Imperial
hospitals and government physicians . . . In government business the
rough-and-ready methods of Arabian administration had given place to a
complicated system of Divans, initiated partly from the Roman, but chiefly taken
from the Persian system of government. Posts, Finance, Privy Seal, Crown Lands,
Justice, and Military affairs were each administered by separate bureaux in the
hands of ministers and officials; an army of clerks, scribes, writers, and
accountants swarmed into these, offices and gradually swept the whole power of
the government into their own hands by separating the Commander of the Faithful
from any direct intercourse with his subjects. The Imperial Palace and the
entourage were equally based on Roman and Persian precedents. Eunuchs, closely
veiled 'harems' of women, guards, spies, go betweens, jesters, poets, and dwarfs
clustered around the person of the Commander of the Faithful, each, in his
degree, endeavoring to gain the royal favour and indirectly distracting the
royal mind from affairs of business and state.

Meanwhile the mercantile trade of the East poured gold into Bagdad, and
supplemented the other enormous stream of money derived from the contributions
of plunder and loot dispatched to the capital by the commanders of the
victorious raiding forces which harried Asia Minor, India, and Turkestan. The
seemingly unending supply of Turkish slaves and Byzantine spice added to the
richness of the revenues of Irak, and, combined with the vast commercial traffic
of which Bagdad was the centre, produced a large and powerful moneyed class,
composed of the sons of generals, officials, landed proprietors, royal
favorites, merchants, and the like, who encouraged the arts, literature,
philosophy, and poetry as the mood took them, building palaces for themselves,
vying with each other in the luxury of their entertainments, suborning poets to
sound their praises, dabbling in philosophy, supporting various schools of
thought, endowing charities, and, in fact, behaving as the wealthy have always
behaved in all ages.

«I have said that the Abbasid Empire in the days of Haroun-al-Raschid was
weak and feeble to a degree, and perhaps the reader will consider this a foolish
proposition when he takes into consideration that I have described the Empire as
orderly, the administration definite and settled, the army efficient, and wealth
abundant. The reason I make the suggestion is that the Abbasid Empire had lost
touch with everything original and vital in Islam, and was constructed entirely
by the reunion of the fragments of the empires Islam had destroyed. There was
nothing in the empire which appealed to the higher instincts of the leaders of
the people; the holy war had degenerated into a systematic acquisition of
plunder. The Caliph had become a luxurious Emperor or King of Kings; the
administration had changed from a patriarchal system to a bureaucracy. The
wealthier classes were rapidly losing all faith in the religion of the state;
speculative philosophy and high living were taking the place of Koranic
orthodoxy and Arabian simplicity. The solitary bond which could have held the
empire together, the sternness and plainness of the Moslem faith, was completely
neglected by both the Caliph and his advisers . . . Haroun-al-Raschid himself
was a winebibber, and his palace was decorated with graven images of birds and
beasts and men . . .

«For a moment we stand amazed at the greatness of the Abbasid dominion; then
suddenly we realize that it is but as a fair husk enclosing the dust and ashes
of dead civilizations».

Haroun-al-Raschid died in 809. At his death his great empire fell immediately
into civil war and confusion, and the next great event of unusual importance in
this region of the world comes two hundred years later when the Turks, under the
chiefs of the great family of the Seljuks, poured southward out of Turkestan,
and not only conquered the empire of Bagdad, but Asia Minor also. Coming from
the northeast as they did, they were able to outflank the great barrier of the
Taurus Mountains, which had hitherto held back the Moslems. They were still much
the same people as those of whom Yuan Chwang gave us a glimpse four hundred
years earlier, but now they were Moslems, and Moslems of the primitive type, men
whom Abu Bekr would have welcomed to Islam. They caused a great revival of
vigour in Islam, and they turned the minds of the Moslem world once more in the
direction of a religious war against Christendom. For there had been a sort of
truce between these two great religions after the cessation of the Moslem
advance and the decline of the Omayyads. Such warfare as had gone on between
Christianity and Islam had been rather border -bickering than sustained war. It
became only a bitter fanatical struggle again in the eleventh century.

.. [#fn8] :t:`The Caliph’s Last Heritage`.
