
31.8 The Intellectual Life of Arab Islam
========================================================================
But before we go on to tell of the Turks and the Crusaders, the great wars
that began between Christendom and Islam, and which have left a quite insane
intolerance between these great systems right down to the present time, it is
necessary to give a little more attention to the intellectual life of the
Arabic-speaking world which was now spreading more and more widely over the
regions which Hellenism had once dominated. For some generations before
Muhammad, the Arab mind had been, as it were, smouldering, it had been producing
poetry and much religious discussion; under the stimulus of the national and
racial successes it presently blazed out with a brilliance second only to that
of the Greeks during their best period. From a new angle and with a fresh vigour
it took up that systematic development of positive knowledge, which the Greeks
had begun and relinquished. It revived the human pursuit of science. If the
Greek was the father, then the Arab was the foster-father of the scientific
method of dealing with reality, that is to say, by absolute frankness, the
utmost simplicity of statement and explanation, exact record, and exhaustive
criticism. Through the Arabs it was and not by the Latin route that the modern
world received that gift of light and power.

Their conquests brought the Arabs into contact with the Greek literary
tradition, not at first directly, but through the Syrian translations of the
Greek writers. The Nestorian Christians, the Christians to the east of
orthodoxy, seem to have been much more intelligent and active- minded than the
court theologians of Byzantium, and at a much higher level of general education
than the Latin-speaking Christians 'of the west. They had been tolerated during
the latter days of the Sassanids, and they were tolerated by Islam until the
ascendancy of the Turks in the eleventh century. They had preserved much of the
Hellenic medical science, and had even added to it. In the Ornayyad times most
of the physicians in the Caliph's dominions were Nestorians, and no doubt many
learned Nestorians professed Islam without any serious compunction or any great
change in their work and thoughts. They had preserved much of Aristotle both in
Greek and in Syrian translations. They had a considerable mathematical
literature. Their equipment makes the contemporary resources of St. Benedict or
Cassiodorus seem very pitiful. To these Nestorian teachers came the fresh Arab
mind out of the desert, keen and curious, and learnt much and improved upon its
teaching.

But the Nestorians were not the only teachers available for the Arabs.
Throughout all the rich cities of the east the kindred Jews were scattered with
their own distinctive literature and tradition, and the Arab and the Jewish mind
reacted upon one another to a common benefit. The Arab was informed and the Jew
sharpened to a keener edge. The Jews have never been pedants in the matter of
their language; we have already noted that a thousand years before Islam they
spoke Greek in Hellenized Alexandria, and now all over this new Moslem world
they were speaking and writing Arabic. Some of the greatest of Jewish literature
was written in Arabic, the religious writings of Maimonides, for example.
Indeed, it is difficult to say in the case of this Arabic culture where the Jew
ends and the Arab begins, so important and essential were its Jewish
factors.

Moreover, there was a third source of inspiration, more particularly in
mathematical science, to which at present it is difficult to do justice -India.
There can be little doubt that the Arab minds during its best period was in
effective contact with Sanskrit literature and with Indian ideas, and that it
derived much from this source.

The distinctive activities of the Arab mind were already manifest under the
Omayyads, though it was during the Abbasid time that it made its best display.
History is the beginning and core of all sound philosophy and all great
literature, and the first Arab writers of distinction were historians,
biographers, and quasi- historical poets. Romantic fiction and the short story
followed as a reading public developed, willing to be amused. And as reading
ceased to be a special accomplishment, and became necessary to every man of
affairs and to every youth of breeding, came the systematic growth of an
educational system and an educational literature. By the ninth and tenth
centuries there are not only grammars, but great lexicons, and a mass of
philological learning in Islam.

And a century or so in advance of the west, there grew up in the Moslem world
at a number of centres, at Basra, at Kufa, at Bagdad and Cairo, and at Cordoba,
out of what were at first religious schools dependent upon mosques, a series of
great universities. The light of these universities shone far beyond the Moslem
world, and drew students to them from east and west. At Cordoba in particular
there were great numbers of Christian students, and the influence of Arab
philosophy -coming by way of Spain upon the universities of Paris, Oxford, and
North Italy and upon Western European thought generally, was very considerable
indeed. The name of Averroes (Ibn-rushd) of Cordoba (1126- 1198) stands out as
that of the culminating influence of Arab philosophy upon European thought. He
developed the teachings of Aristotle upon lines that made a sharp division
between religious and scientific truth, and so prepared the way for the
liberation of scientific, research from the theological dogmatism that
restrained it both under Christianity and under Islam. Another great name is
that of Avicenna (Ibnsina), the Prince of Physicians (980-1037), who was born at
the other end of the Arabic world at Bokhara, and who travelled in Khorasan . .
. The book-copying industry flourished at Alexandria, Damascus, Cairo, and
Bagdad, and about the year 970 there were twenty-seven free schools open in
Cordoba for the education of the poor.

«In mathematics», say Thatcher and Shwill,\ [#fn9]_  «the Arabs built on the
foundations of the Greek mathematicians. The origin of the so-called Arabic
numerals is obscure. Under Theodoric the Great, Boethius made use of certain
signs which were in part very like the nine digits which we now use. One of the
pupils of Gerbert also used signs which were still more like ours but the zero
was unknown till the twelfth century, when it was invented by an Arab
mathematician named Muhammad-Ibn-Musa, who also was the first to, use the
decimal notation, and who gave the digits the value of position. In geometry the
Arabs did not add much to Euclid, but algebra is practically their creation;
also they developed spherical trigonometry, inventing the sine, tangent, and
cotangent. In physics they invented the pendulum, and produced work on optics.
They made progress in the science of astronomy. They built several
observatories, and constructed many astronomical instruments, which are still in
use. They calculated the angle of the ecliptic and the precession of the
equinoxes. Their knowledge of astronomy was undoubtedly considerable.

«In medicine they made great advances over the work of the Greeks. They
studied physiology and hygiene, and their *materia medica* was practically
the same as ours today. Many of their methods of treatment are still in use
among us. Their surgeons understood the use of anesthetic, and performed some of
the most difficult operations known. At the time when in Europe the practice of
medicine was forbidden by the Church, which expected cures to be effected by
religious rites performed by the clergy, the Arabs had a real science of
medicine. In chemistry they made a good beginning. They discovered many new
substances, such as alcohol,\ [#fn10]_  potash, nitrate of silver, corrosive
sublimate, and nitric and sulphuric acid . . . In manufactures they out did the
world in variety and beauty of design and perfection of workmanship. They worked
in all the metals-gold, silver, copper, bronze, iron, and steel.

In textile fabrics they have never been surpassed. They made glass and
pottery of the finest quality. They knew the secrets of dyeing, and they
manufactured paper. They had many processes of dressing leather, and their work
was famous throughout Europe. They made tinctures, essences, and syrups. They
made sugar from the cane, and grew many fine kinds of wine. They practised
farming in a scientific way, and had good systems of irrigation. They knew the
value of fertilizers, and adapted their crops to the quality of the ground. They
excelled in horticulture, knowing how to graft and how to produce new varieties
of fruit and flowers. They introduced into the, west many trees and plants from
the east, and wrote scientific treatises on farming».

One item in this account must be underlined here because of its importance in
the intellectual life of mankind, the manufacture of paper. This the Arabs seem
to have learnt from the Chinese by way of Central Asia. The Europeans acquired
it from the Arabs. Until that time books had to be written upon parchment or
papyrus, and after the Arab conquest of Egypt Europe was cut off from the
papyrus supply. Until paper became abundant, the art of printing was of little
use, and newspapers and popular education by means of books was impossible. This
was probably a much more important factor in the relative backwardness of Europe
during the dark ages than historians seem disposed to admit . . .

And all this mental life went on in the Moslem world in spite of a very
considerable amount of political disorder. From first to last the Arabs never
grappled with the problem, the still unsolved problem, of the stable progressive
state; everywhere their form of government was absolutist and subject to the
convulsions, changes, intrigues, and murders that have always characterized the
extremer forms of monarchy. But for some centuries, beneath the crimes and
rivalries of courts and camps, the spirit of Islam did preserve a certain
general decency and restraint in life; the Byzantine Empire was impotent to
shatter this civilization, and the Turkish danger in the north-east gathered
strength only very slowly. 'Until the Turk fell upon it, the intellectual life
of Islam continued. Perhaps it secretly flattered itself that it would always
be, able to go on in spite of the thread of violence and unreason in its
political direction. Hitherto in all countries that has been the characteristic
attitude of science and literature. The intellectual man has been both to come
to grips with the forcible man. He has generally been something of a courtier
and time-server. Possibly he has never yet been quite sure of himself. Hitherto
men of reason and knowledge have never had the assurance and courage of the
religious fanatic. But there can be little doubt that they have accumulated
settled convictions and gathered confidence during the last few centuries; they
have slowly found a means to power through the development of popular education
and popular literature, and to-day they are far more disposed to say things
plainly and to claim a dominating voice in the organization of human affairs
than they have ever been before in the world's history.

.. [#fn9] A General History of Europe.

.. [#fn10] Alcohol as "spirits of wine" was known to Pliny (79 A.D.). The student of the history of science should consult Campbell Brown’s :t:`History of Chemistry` and check these statements in the text.
