6.1 A New Age of Life
=========================
The third great division of the geological record, the Cainozoic, opens with
a world already physically very like the world we live in today. Probably the
day was at first still perceptibly shorter, but the scenery had become very
modern in its character. Climate was, of course, undergoing, age by age, its
incessant and irregular variations; lands that are temperate today have
passed, since the Cainozoic age began, through phases of great warmth,
intense cold, and extreme dryness; but the landscape, if it altered, altered
to nothing that cannot still be paralleled today in some part of the world or
other. In the place of the cycads, sequoias, and strange conifers of the
Mesozoic, the plant names that now appear in the lists of fossils include
birch, beech, holly, tulip trees, ivy, sweet gum, bread-fruit trees. Flowers
had developed concurrently with bees and butterflies. Palms were now very
important. Such plants had already been in evidence in the later levels of
the (American Cretaceous) Mesozoic, but now they dominated the scene
altogether. Grass was becoming a great fact in the world. Certain grasses,
too, had appeared in the later Mesozoic, but only with the Cainozoic period
came grass plains and turf spreading wide over a world that was once barren
stone.

The period opened with a long phase of considerable warmth; then the world
cooled. And in the opening of this third part of the record, this Cainozoic
period, a gigantic crumpling of the earth's crust and an upheaval of mountain
ranges was in progress. The Alps, the Andes, the Himalayas, are all Cainozoic
mountain ranges; the background of an early Cainozoic scene to be typical
should display an active, volcano or so. It must have been an age of great
earthquakes.

Geologists make certain main divisions of the Cainozoic period, and it will
be convenient to name them here and to indicate their climate. First comes
the *Eocene* (dawn of recent life), an age of exceptional warmth in the
world's history, subdivided into an older and newer Eocene; then the
*Oligocene*, (but little of recent life), in which the climate was still
equable. The *Miocene* (with living species still in a minority) was the
great age of mountain building, and the general temperature was falling. In
the *Pliocene* (more living than extinct species), climate was very much as
its present phase; but with the *Pleistocene* (a great majority of living
species) there set in a long period of extreme conditions â€“ it was the Great
Ice Age. Glaciers spread from the poles towards the equator, until England to
the Thames was covered in ice. Thereafter to our own time came a period of
partial recovery. We may be moving now towards a warmer phase. Half a million
years hence this may be a much sunnier and pleasanter world to live in than
it is today.
