6.3 An Age of Brain Growth
=============================
A number of types of mammal already appear in the Eocene. Some are
differentiating in one direction, and some in another, some are perfecting
themselves as herbivorous quadrupeds, some leap and climb among the trees,
some turn back to the water to swim, but all types are unconsciously
exploiting and developing the brain which is the instrument of this new power
of acquisition and educability. In the Eocene rocks are found small early
predecessors of the horse (Eohippus), tiny camels, pigs, early tapirs, early
hedgehogs, monkeys and lemurs, opossums and carnivores. Now, all these were
more or less ancestral to living forms, and all have brains relatively much
smaller than their living representatives. There is, for instance, an early,
rhinoceros-like beast, *Titanotherium*, with a brain not one-tenth the size
of that of the existing rhinoceros. The latter is by no means a perfect type
of the attentive and submissive student, but even so it is ten times more
observant and teachable than its predecessor. This sort of thing is true of
all the orders and families that survive until today. All the Cainozoic
mammals were doing this one thing in common under the urgency of a common
necessity; they were all growing brain. It was a parallel advance. In the
same order or family today, the brain is usually from six to ten times what
it was in the Eocene ancestor.

The Eocene period displayed a series of herbivorous brutes of which no
representative survives today. Such were the Uintatheres and the
Titanotheres. They were ousted by more specialized graminivorous forms as
grass spread over the world. In pursuit of such beasts came great swarms of
primitive dogs, some as big as bears, and the first cats, one in particular
(*Smilodon*), a small fierce-looking creature with big knife-like canines,
the first sabre-toothed tiger, which was to develop into greater things.
American deposits in the Miocene display a great variety of camels, giraffe
camels with long necks, gazelle camels, llamas, and true camels. North
America, throughout most of the Cainozoic period, appears to have been in
open and easy continuation with Asia, and when at last the glaciers of the
Great Ice Age, and then the Bering Strait, came to separate the two great
continental regions, the last camels were left in the old world and the
llamas in the new.

In the Eocene the first ancestors of the elephants appear in northern Africa
as snouted creatures; the elephant's trunk dawned on the world in the
Miocene.

One group of creatures is of peculiar interest in a history that is mainly to
be the story of mankind. We find fossils in the Eocene of monkeys and lemurs,
but of one particular creature we have as yet not a single bone. It must have
been a creature half ape, half monkey; it clambered about the trees and ran,
and probably ran well, on its bind-legs upon the ground. It was small-brained
by our present standards, but it had clever hands with which it handled
fruits and beat nuts upon the rocks and caught up sticks and stones to smite
its fellows. Spite of the lack of material evidence, the facts of biological
science almost compel us to believe that such a creature existed, the common
ancestor of the anthropoid apes and the two species of men we will describe
in the next chapter.
