6.4 The World Grows Hard Again
=================================
Through millions of simian generations the spinning world circled about the
sun; slowly its orbit, which may have been nearly circular during the equable
days of the early Eocene, was drawn by the attraction of the circling outer
planets into a more elliptical form. Its axis of rotation, which had always
heeled over to the plane of its orbit, as the mast of a yacht under sail
heels over to the level of the water, heeled over by imperceptible degrees a
little more and a little more. And each year its summer point shifted a
little further from perihelion round its path. These were small changes to
happen to a one-inch ball, circling at a distance of 330 yards from a flaming
sun nine feet across, in the course of a few million years. They were changes
an immortal astronomer in Neptune, watching the earth from age to age, would
have found almost imperceptible. But from the point of view of the surviving
mammalian life of the Miocene, they mattered profoundly. Age by age the
winters grew on the whole colder and harder and a few hours longer relatively
to the summers in a thousand years; age by age the summers grew briefer. On
an average the winter snow lay a little later in the spring in each century,
and the glaciers in the northern mountains gained an inch this year, receded
half an inch next, came on again a few inches....

The Record of the Rocks tells of the increasing chill. The Pliocene was a
temperate time, and many of the warmth-loving plants and animals had gone.
Then, rather less deliberately, some feet or some inches every year, the ice
came on.

An arctic fauna, musk ox, woolly mammoth, woolly rhinoceros, lemming, ushers
in the Pleistocene. Over North America, and Europe and Asia alike, the ice
advanced. For thousands of years it advanced, and then for thousands of years
it receded, to advance again. Europe down to the Baltic shores, Britain down
to the Thames, North America down to New England, and more centrally as far
south as Ohio, lay for ages under the glaciers. Enormous volumes of water
were withdrawn from the ocean and locked up in those stupendous ice caps so
as to cause a world-wide change in the relative levels of land and sea. Vast
areas were exposed that are now again sea bottom.

The world today is still coming slowly out of the last of four great waves of
cold. It is not growing warmer steadily. There have been fluctuations.
Remains of bog oaks, for example, which grew two or three thousand years ago,
are found in Scotland at latitudes in which not even a stunted oak will grow
at the present time. And it is amidst this crescendo and diminuendo of frost
and snow that we first recognize forms that are like the forms of men. The
Age of Mammals culminated in ice and hardship and man.
