
27.2 Finance in the Roman State
========================================================================

Another respect in which the Roman system was a crude
anticipation of our own, and different from any preceding political system we
have considered, was that it was a cash and credit-using system. Money had been
in the world as yet for only a few centuries. But its use had been growing; it
was providing a fluid medium for trade and enterprise, and changing economic
conditions profoundly. In republican Rome, the financier and the «money»
interest began to play a part recognizably similar to their roles today.

We have already noted–in our account of Herodotus–that a
first effect of money was to give freedom of movement and leisure to a number
of people who could not otherwise have enjoyed these privileges. And that is
the peculiar value of money to mankind. Instead of a worker or helper being
paid in kind and in such a way that he is tied as much in his enjoyment as in
his labour, money leaves him free to do as he pleases amidst a wide choice of
purchasable aids, eases, and indulgences. He may eat his money or drink it or
give it to a temple or spend it in learning something or save it against some
unforeseen occasion. That is the good of money, the freedom of its universal
convertibility. But the freedom money gives the poor man is nothing to the
freedom money has given the rich man. With money rich men ceased to be tied to
lands, houses, stores, flocks and herds. They could change the nature and
locality of their possessions with an unheard-of freedom. In the third and
second century B.C., this release, this untethering of wealth, began to tell
upon the general economic life of the Roman and Hellenized world. People began
to buy land and the like not for use, but to sell again at a profit; people
borrowed to buy, speculation developed. No doubt there were bankers in the
Babylon of 1000 B.C., but they lent in a far more limited and solid way, bars
of metal and stocks of goods. That earlier world was a world of barter and
payment in kind, and it went slowly–and much more staidly and stably–for that
reason. In that state the vast realm of China has remained almost down to the
present time.

The big cities before Rome were trading and manufacturing
cities. Such were Corinth and Carthage and Syracuse. But Rome never produced a
very considerable industrial population, and her warehouses never rivalled
those of Alexandria. The little port of Ostia was always big enough for her
needs. Rome was a political and financial capital, and in the latter respect,
at least, she was a new sort of city. She imported profits and tribute, and
very little went out from her in return. The wharves of Ostia were chiefly busy
unloading corn from Sicily and Africa and loot from all the world.

After the fall of Carthage the Roman imagination went wild
with the hitherto unknown possibilities of finance. Money, like most other
inventions, had «happened» to mankind, and men had still to develop– today they
have still to perfect–the science and morality of money. One sees the thing
«catching on» in the recorded life and the writings of Cato the Censor. In his
early days he was bitterly virtuous against usury; in his later he was devising
ingenious schemes for safe usury.

In this curiously interesting century of Roman history we
find man after man asking, «What has happened to Rome?» Various answers are
made–a decline in religion, a decline from the virtues of the Roman
forefathers, Greek «intellectual poison», and the like. We who can look at the
problem with a large perspective, can see that what had happened to Rome was
«money»–the new freedoms and chances and opportunities that money opened out.
Money floated the Romans off the firm ground, everyone was getting hold of
money, the majority by the simple expedient of running into debt; the eastward
expansion of the empire was very largely a hunt for treasure in strong rooms
and temples to keep pace with the hunger of the new need. The Equestrian order,
in particular, became the money power. Everyone was developing property.
Farmers were giving up corn and cattle, borrowing money, buying slaves, and
starting the more intensive cultivation of oil and wine. Money was young in
human experience and wild, nobody had it under control. It fluctuated greatly.
It was now abundant and now scarce. Men made sly and crude schemes to corner
it, to hoard it, to send up prices by releasing hoarded metals. A small body of
very shrewd men was growing immensely rich. Many patricians were growing poor
and irritated and unscrupulous. Among the middle sort of peoples there was much
hope, much adventure, and much more disappointment. The growing mass of the
expropriated was permeated by that vague, baffled, and hopeless sense of being
inexplicably bested, which is the preparatory condition for all great
revolutionary movements.
