18.1 The Common Man in Ancient Times
================================================================
We have been sketching in the last four chapters the growth of civilized
states out of the primitive Neolithic agriculture that began in Mesopotamia
perhaps *15,000* years ago. It was at first horticulture rather than
agriculture; it was done with the hoe before the plough, and at first it was
quite supplementary to the sheep, goat, and cattle tending that made the
"living" of the family tribe. We have traced the broad outlines of the
development in regions of exceptional fruitfulness of the first settled
village communities into more populous towns and cities, and the growth of
the village shrine and the village medicine-man into the city temple and the
city priesthood. We have noted the beginnings of organized war, first as a
flickering between villages, and then as a more disciplined struggle between
the priest-king and god of one city and those of another. Our story has
passed on rapidly from the first indications of conquest and empire in Sumer,
6,000 or 7,000 B.C., to the spectacle of great empires growing up, with roads
and armies, with inscriptions and written documents, with educated
priesthoods and kings and rulers sustained by a tradition already ancient. We
have traced in broad outline the appearance and conflicts and replacements of
these empires of the great rivers. We have directed attention, in particular,
to the evidence of a development of still wider political ideas as we find it
betrayed by the actions and utterances of such men as Nabonidus and Amenophis
IV. It has been an outline of the accumulations of human experience for ten
or fifteen thousand years, a vast space of time in comparison with all
subsequent, history, but a brief period when we measure it against the
succession of endless generations that intervenes between us and the first
rude flint-using human creatures of the Pleistocene dawn. But for these last
four chapters we have been writing almost entirely not about mankind
generally, but only about the men who thought, the men who could draw and
read and write, the men who were altering their world. Beneath their
activities what was the life, of the mute multitude?

The life of the common man was, of course, affected and changed by these
things, just as the lives of the domestic, animals and the face of the
cultivated country were changed; but for the most part it was a change
suffered and not a change in which the common man upon the land had any voice
or will. Reading and writing were not yet for the likes of him. He went on
cultivating his patch, loving his wife and children, beating his dog and
tending his beasts, grumbling at hard times, fearing the magic of the priests
and the power of the, gods, desiring little more except to be left alone by
the, powers above him. So he was in 10,000 B.C.; so he was, unchanged in
nature and out look, in the time of Alexander the Great; so over the greater
part of the world be remains today. He got rather better tools, better seeds,
better methods, a slightly sounder house, he sold his produce in a more
organized market as civilization progressed. A certain freedom and a certain
equality passed out of human life when men ceased to wander. Men paid in
liberty for safety, shelter, and regular meals. By imperceptible degrees the
common man found the patch be cultivated was not his own; it belonged to the
god; and he had to pay a fraction of his produce to the god. Or the god had
given it to the king, who exacted his rent and tax. Or the king had given it
to an official, who was the lord of the common man. And sometimes the god or
the king or the noble had work to be done, and then the common man had to
leave his patch and work for his master.

How far the patch he cultivated was his own was never very clear to him. In
ancient Assyria, the land seems to have been held as a sort of freehold and
the occupier paid taxes; in Babylonia the land was the god's, and he
permitted the cultivator to work thereon. In Egypt the temples or Pharaoh-
the-god or the nobles under Pharaoh were the owners and rent receivers. But
the cultivator was not a slave; he was a peasant, and only bound to the land
in so far that there was nothing else for him to do but cultivate, and
nowhere else for him to go. He lived in a village or town, and went out to
his work. The village, to begin with, was often merely a big household of
related people under a patriarch headman, the early town a group of
householders under its elders. There was no process of enslavement as
civilization grew, but the headmen and leaderly men grew in power and
authority, and the common men did not keep pace with them, and fell into a
tradition of dependence and subordination.

On the whole, the common men were probably well content to live under lord or
king or god and obey their bidding. It was safer. It was easier. All animals
— and man is no exception — begin life as dependents. Most men never shake
themselves loose from the desire for leading and protection.\ [#fn1]_

.. [#fn1] There were literary expressions of social discontent in Egypt before 2,000 B.C. See "Social Forces and Religion" in Breasted's `Religion and Thought in Ancient Egypt`_ for some of the earliest complaints of the common man under the ancient civilizations.

.. _Religion and Thought in Ancient Egypt: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1402141297?ie=UTF8&tag=mindvessel-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=1402141297 (Development of Religion and Thought inAncient Egypt: Lectures delivered on the Morse Foundation at UnionTheological Seminary)

