
18.2 The Earliest Slaves
================================================================
The earlier wars did not involve remote or prolonged campaigns, and they were
waged by levies of the common people. But war brought in a new source of
possessions, plunder, and a new social factor, the captive. In the earlier,
simpler days of war, the captive man was kept only to be tortured or
sacrificed to the victorious god; the captive women and children were
assimilated into the tribe. But later many captives were spared to be slaves
because they had exceptional gifts or peculiar arts. It would be the kings
and captains who would take these slaves at first, and it would speedily
become apparent to them that these men were much more their own than were the
peasant cultivators and common men of their own race. The slave could be
commanded to do all sorts of things for his, master that the quasi-free
common man would not do, so willingly because of his attachment to his own
patch of cultivation. From a very early period the artificer was often a
household slave, and the manufacture of trade goods, pottery, textiles, metal
ware, and so forth, such as went on vigorously in the household city of the
Minos of Cnossos, was probably a slave industry from the beginning. Sayce, in
his `Babylonians And Assyrians`_, quotes Babylonian agreements for the teaching of trades to slaves, and
dealing with the exploitation of slave products.

.. _Babylonians And Assyrians: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1436950635?ie=UTF8&tag=mindvessel-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=1436950635 (Babylonians And Assyrians: Life And Customs (1899))

Slaves produced slave children, enslavement in discharge of debts added to
the slave population; it is probable that as the cities grew larger, a larger
part of the new population consisted of these slave artificers and slave
servants in the large households. They were by no means abject slaves; in
later Babylon their lives and property were protected by elaborate laws. Nor
were they all outlanders. Parents might sell their children into slavery, and
brothers their orphan sisters. Free men who had no means of livelihood would
even sell themselves into slavery. And slavery was the fate of the in solvent
debtor. Craft apprenticeship, again, was a sort of fixed-term slavery. Out of
the slave population, by a converse process, arose the freed-man and freed-
woman, who worked for wages and had still more definite individual rights.
Since in Babylon slaves could themselves own property, many slaves saved up
and bought themselves. Probably the town slave was often better off and
practically as free as the cultivator of the soil, and as the rural
population increased, its sons and daughters came to mix with and swell the
growing ranks of artificers, some bound, some free.


.. _Figure 199:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0199.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0199.png
    :figclass: full-figure
    :width: 560px
    :alt: Figure 199

    Figure 199: Egyptian Peasants seized for non-payment of taxes (Pyramid Age)

As the extent and complexity of government increased, the number of
households multiplied. Under the king's household grew -up the households of
his great ministers and officials, under the temple grew up the personal
households of temple functionaries; it is not difficult to realize how houses
and patches of land would become more and more distinctly the property of the
occupiers, and more and more definitely alienated from the original owner-
god. The earlier empires in Egypt and China both passed into a feudal stage,
in which families, originally official, became for a time independent noble
families. In the later stages of Babylonian civilization we find an
increasing propertied class of people appearing in the social structure,
neither slaves nor peasants nor priests nor officials, but widows and
descendants of such people, or successful traders and the like, and all
*masterless* folk. Traders came in from the outside. Babylon was full of
Aramean traders, who had great establishments, with slaves, freed-men,
employees of all sorts. Their book-keeping was a serious undertaking. It
involved storing a great multitude of earthenware tablets in huge earthenware
jars. Upon this gathering mixture of more or less free and detached people
would live other people, traders, merchants, small dealers, catering for
their needs. Sayce *(op. cit.)* gives the particulars of an agreement for the
setting up and stocking of a tavern and beer house, for example. The passer-
by, the man who happened to be about, had come into existence.

But another and far less kindly sort of slavery also arose in the old
civilization, and that was gang slavery. If it did not figure very largely in
the cities, it was very much in evidence elsewhere. The king was, to begin
with, the chief *entrepreneur.* He made the canals and organized the
irrigation (*e.g.* Hammurabi's enterprises noted in the previous chapter). He
exploited mines. He seems (at Cnossos, e.g.) to have organized manufactures
for export. The Pharaohs of the 1st Dynasty were already working the copper
and turquoise mines in the peninsula of Sinai. For many such purposes gangs
of captives were cheaper and far more controllable than levies of the king's
own people. From an early period, too, captives may have tugged the oars of
the galleys, though Torr (`Ancient Ships`_) notes that up to the age of
Pericles (450 B.C.) the free Athenians were not above this task. And the
monarch also found slaves convenient for his military expeditions. They were
uprooted men; they did not fret to go home, because they had no homes to go
to. The Pharaohs hunted slaves in Nubia, in order to have black troops for
their Syrian expeditions. Closely allied to such slave troops were the
mercenary barbaric troops the monarchs caught into their service, not by
positive compulsion, but by the bribes of food and plunder and under the
pressure of need. As the old civilization developed, these mercenary armies
replaced the national levies of the old order more and more, and servile gang
labour became a more and more important and significant factor in the
economic system. From mines and canal and wall building, the servile gang
spread into cultivation. Nobles and temples adopted the gang-slave system for
their works. Plantation gangs began to oust the patch cultivation of the
labourer-serf in the case, of some staple products. . . .

.. _Ancient Ships: http://www.archive.org/details/ancientships00torruoft

.. _Figure 201:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0201.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0201.png
    :figclass: full-figure
    :width: 560px
    :alt: Figure 201

    Figure 201: Brawl among boatmen (From tomb of Ptah-hetep â€” Pyramid Age)
