
18.3 The First "Independent" Persons
================================================================

.. _Figure 203:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0203.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0203.png
    :figclass: full-figure
    :width: 560px
    :alt: Figure 203

    Figure 203: Social Types in Ancient Communities

    Statuettes from middle class Egyptian tombs showing low-class social types in
    the ancient communities: foot soldier, brewer, musician, servant.

So, in a few paragraphs, we trace the development of the simple social
structure of the early Sumerian cities to the complex city crowds, the
multitude of individuals varying in race, tradition, education, and function,
varying in wealth, freedom, authority, and usefulness, in the great cities of
the last thousand years B.C. The most notable thing of all is the gradual
increase amidst this heterogeneous multitude of what we may call free
*individuals,* detached persons who are neither priests, nor kings, nor
officials, nor serfs, nor slaves, who are under no great pressure to work,
who have time to read and inquire. They appear side by side with the
development of social security and private property. Coined money and
monetary reckoning developed. The operations of the Arameans and such-like
Semitic trading people led to the organization of credit and monetary
security. In the earlier days almost the only property, except a few
movables, consisted of rights in land and in houses; later, one could deposit
and lend securities, could go away and return to find one's property
faithfully held and secure. Towards the middle of the period of the Persian
Empire there lived one free individual, Herodotus, who has a great interest
for us because he was among the first writers of critical and intelligent
history, as distinguished from a mere priestly or court chronicle. It is
worthwhile to glance here very briefly at the circumstances of his life.
Later on we shall quote from his history.

We have already noted the conquest of Babylonia by the Aryan Persians under
Cyrus in 539 B.C. We have noted, further, that the Persian Empire spread into
Egypt, where its hold was precarious; and it extended also over Asia Minor.
Herodotus was born about 484 B.C. in a Greek city of Asia Minor,
Halicarnassus, which was under the overlordship of the Persians, and directly
under the rule of a political boss or tyrant. There is no sign that he was
obliged either to work for a living or spend very much time in the
administration of his property. We do not know the particulars of his
affairs, but it is clear that in this minor Greek city, under foreign rule,
he was able to obtain and read and study manuscripts of nearly everything
that had been written in the Greek language before his time. He travelled, so
far as one can gather, with freedom and comfort about the Greek archipelagos;
he stayed wherever he wanted to stay, and he seems to have found comfortable
accommodation; he went to Babylon and to Susa, the new capital the Persians
had set up in Babylonia to the east of the Tigris; he toured along the coast
of the Black Sea, and accumulated a considerable, amount of knowledge about
the Scythians, the Aryan people who were then distributed over South Russia;
he went, to the south of Italy, explored the antiquities of Tyre, coasted
Palestine, landed at Gaza, and made a long stay in Egypt. He went about Egypt
looking at temples and monuments and gathering information. We know not only
from him, but from other evidence, that in those days the older temples and
the pyramids (which were already nearly three thousand years old) were
visited by strings of tourists, a special sort of priests acting as guides.
The inscriptions the sightseers scribbled upon the walls remain to this day,
and many of them have been deciphered and published.

As his knowledge accumulated, be conceived the idea of writing a great
history of the attempts of Persia to subdue Greece. But in order to introduce
that, history he composed an account of the past of Greece, Persia, Assyria,
Babylonia, Egypt, Scythia, and of the geography and peoples of those
countries. He then set himself, it is said, to make his history known among
his friends in Halicarnassus by reciting it to them, but they failed to
appreciate it; and he then betook himself to Athens, the most flourishing of
all Greek cities at that time. There his work was received with applause. We
find him in the centre of a brilliant circle of intelligent and active-minded
people, and the city authorities voted him a reward of ten talents (a sum of
money equivalent to Â£2,400) in recognition of his literary achievement. . . .

But we will not complete the biography of this most interesting man, nor will
we enter into any criticism of his garrulous, marvel-telling, and most
entertaining history. It is a book to which all intelligent readers come
sooner or later, abounding as it does in illuminating errors and Boswellian
charm. We give these particulars here simply to show that in the fifth
century B.C. a new factor was becoming evident in human affairs. Reading and
writing had already long escaped from the temple precincts and the ranks of
the court scribes. Record was no longer confined to court and temple. A new
sort of people, these people of leisure and independent means, were asking
questions, exchanging knowledge and views, and developing ideas. So beneath
the march of armies and the policies of monarchs, and above the common lives
of illiterate and incurious men, we note the beginnings of what is becoming
at last nowadays a dominant power in human affairs, the *free intelligence of
mankind.*

Of that free intelligence we shall have more to say when in a subsequent
chapter we tell of the Greeks.

