
18.5 Classes Hardening into Castes
================================================================
Let us, before we leave this discussion of the social classes that were
developing in these first civilizations, devote a little attention to their
fixity. How far did they stand aloof from each other, and how far did they
intermingle? So far as the classes we have counted as 9, 10, 11, and 12 go,
the servants, the gang labourers and slaves, the gang soldiers, and to a
lesser extent the sailors, or at any rate the galley rowers among the
sailors, they were largely recruited classes, they did not readily and easily
form homes, they were not distinctively breeding classes; they were probably
replenished generation after generation by captives, by the failures of other
classes, and especially from the failures of the class of small retailers,
and by persuasion and impressment from among the cultivators. But so, far as
the sailors go, we have to distinguish between the mere rower and the
navigating and ship owning seaman of such ports as Tyre and Sidon. The ship
owners pass, no doubt, by insensible gradations into the mercantile class,
but the navigators must have made a peculiar community in the great seaports,
having homes there and handing on the secrets of seacraft to their sons. The
eighth class we have distinguished was certainly a precarious class,
continually increased by the accession of the heirs and dependents, the,
widows and retired members of the wealthy and powerful, and continually
diminished by the deaths or speculative losses of these people and the
dispersal of their properties. The priests and priestess, too, so far as all
this world west of India went, were not a very reproductive class; many
priest hoods were celibate, and that class, too, may also be counted as a
recruited class. Nor are servants, as a rule reproductive. They live in the,
households of other people; they do not have households and rear large
families of their own. This leaves us as the really vital classes of the
ancient civilized community:

*(a)* The royal and aristocratic class, officials, military officers, and the
like;

*(b)* The mercantile class;

*(c)* The town artisans;

*(d)* The cultivators of the soil; and

*(e)* The herdsmen.

Each of these classes reared its own children in its own fashion, and so
naturally kept itself more or less continuously distinct from the others.
General education was not organized in those ancient states, education was
mainly a household matter (as it is still in many parts of India today), and
so it was natural and necessary for the sons to follow in the footsteps of
their father and to marry women accustomed to their own sort of household.
Except during times of great political disturbance, therefore, there would be
a natural and continuous separation of classes; which would not, however,
prevent exceptional individuals from intermarrying or passing from one class
to another. Poor aristocrats would marry rich members of the mercantile
class; ambitious herdsmen, artisans, or sailors would become rich merchants.
So far as one can gather, that was the general state of affairs in both Egypt
and Babylonia. The idea was formerly entertained that in Egypt there was a
fixity of classes, but this appears to be a misconception due to a misreading
of Herodotus. The only exclusive class in Egypt which did not intermarry was,
as in England today, the semi-divine royal family.

At various points in the social system there were probably developments of
exclusiveness, an actual barring out of interlopers. Artisans of particular
crafts possessing secrets, for example, have among all races and in all ages
tended to develop guild organizations restricting the practice of their craft
and the marriage of members outside their guild. Conquering people have also,
and especially when there were marked physical differences of race, been
disposed to keep themselves aloof from the conquered peoples, and have
developed an aristocratic exclusiveness. Such organizations of restriction
upon free intercourse have come and gone in great variety in the history of
all long-standing civilization. The natural boundaries of function were
always there, but sometimes they have been drawn sharply and laid stress
upon, and sometimes they have been made little of. There has been a general
tendency among the Aryan peoples to distinguish noble (patrician) from common
(plebeian) families; the traces of it are evident throughout the literature
and life of Europe today, and it has received a picturesque enforcement in
the "science" of heraldry. This tradition is still active even in democratic
America. Germany, the most methodical of European countries, had in the
Middle Ages a very clear conception of the fixity of such distinctions. Below
the princes (who themselves constituted an exclusive class which did not
marry beneath itself) there were the:

*(a)* Knights, the military and official caste, with heraldic coats-of-arms;

(*b* and *c*) The Burgerstand, the merchants, shipping people, and artisans;
and

*(d)* The Bauernstand, the cultivating serfs or peasants.

Mediaeval Germany went as far as any of the Western heirs of the first great
civilizations towards a fixation of classes. The idea is far less congenial
both to the English-speaking people and to the French and Italians, who, by a
sort of instinct, favour a free movement from class to class. Such exclusive
ideas began at first among, and were promoted chiefly by, the upper classes,
but it is a natural response and a natural Nemesis to such ideas that the
mass of the excluded should presently range themselves in antagonism to their
superiors. It was in Germany, as we shall see in the concluding chapters of
this story, that the conception of a natural and necessary conflict, "the
class war", between the miscellaneous multitudes of the disinherited ("the
class-conscious proletariat" of the Marxist) and the rulers and merchants
first arose. It was an idea more acceptable to the German mind than to the
British or French. . . . But before we come to that conflict, we must
traverse a long history of many centuries.

