
18.6 Caste in India
================================================================
If now we turn eastward from this main development of civilization in the
world between Central Asia and the Atlantic, to the social development of
India in the 2000 years next before the Christian era, we find certain broad
and very, interesting differences. The first of these is that we find such a
fixity of classes in process of establishment as no other part of the world
can present. This fixity of classes is known to Europeans as the institution
of *caste*;\ [#fn2]_ its origins are still in complete obscurity, but it was
certainly well rooted in the Ganges valley before the days of Alexander the
Great. It is a complicated horizontal division of the social structure into
classes or castes, the members of which may neither eat nor intermarry with
persons of a lower caste under penalty of becoming outcasts, and who may also
?lose caste? for various ceremonial negligences and defilements. By losing
caste a man does not sink to a lower caste; he becomes outcast. The various
subdivisions of caste are very complex; many are practically trade
organizations. Each caste has its local organization which maintains
discipline, distributes various charities, looks after its own poor, protects
the common interests of its members, and examines the credentials of
newcomers from other districts. (There is little to check the pretensions of
a travelling Hindu to be of a higher caste than is legitimately his.)
Originally, the four main castes seem to have been:

The Brahmins — the priests and teachers;

The Kshatriyas — the warriors;

The Vaisyas — herdsmen, merchants, moneylenders, and landowners;

The Sudras;

And, outside the castes, the Pariahs.

But these primary divisions have long been complicated by subdivision into a
multitude of minor castes, all exclusive, each holding its members to one
definite way of living and one group of associates. In Bengal the Kshatriyas
and Vaisyas have largely disappeared. But this is too intricate a question
for us to deal with here in any detail.

Next to this extraordinary fission and complication of the social body we
have to note that the Brahmins, the priests and teachers of the Indian world,
unlike so many Western priesthoods, are a reproductive and exclusive class,
taking no recruits from any other, social stratum.

Whatever may have been the original incentive to this extensive fixation of
class in India, there can be little doubt of the role played by the Brahmins
as the custodians of tradition and the only teachers of the people in
sustaining it. By some it is supposed that the first three of the four
original castes, known also as the "twice born", were the descendants of the
Vedic Aryan conquerors of India, who established these hard and fast
separations to prevent racial mixing with the conquered Sudras and Pariahs.
The Sudras are represented as a previous wave of northern conquerors, and the
Pariahs are the original Dravidian inhabitants of India. But these
speculations are not universally accepted, and it is, perhaps, rather the
case that the uniform conditions of life in the Ganges valley throughout long
centuries served to stereotype a difference of classes that have never had
the same steadfastness of definition under the more various and variable
conditions of the greater world to the west.

However caste arose, there can be no doubt of its extraordinary, hold upon
the Indian mind. In the sixth century B.C. arose Gautama, the great teacher
of Buddhism, proclaiming, "As the four streams that flow into the Ganges lose
their names, as soon as they mingle their waters in the holy river, so all
who believe in Buddha cease to be Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas, and Sudras".
His teaching prevailed in India for some centuries; it spread over China,
Tibet, Japan, Burmah, Ceylon, Turkestan, Manchuria; it is today the religion
of a large fraction of the human race, but it was finally defeated and driven
out of Indian life by the vitality and persistence of the Brahmins and of
their caste ideas.

.. [#fn2] From *casta,* a word of Portuguese origin; the Indian word is *varna,* colour.


