
18.7 The System of the Mandarins
================================================================
In China we find a social system travelling along yet another, and only a
very roughly parallel line to that followed by the Indian and Western
civilizations. The Chinese civilization even more than the Hindu is organized
for peace, and the warrior plays a small part in its social scheme. As in the
Indian civilization, the leading class is an intellectual one; less priestly
than the Brahmin and more official. But unlike the Brahmins, the
`mandarins`_, who are the literate men of China, are not a caste; one is not
a mandarin by birth, but by education; they are drawn by education and
examination from all classes of the community, and the son of a mandarin has
no prescriptive right to succeed his father.\ [#fn3]_ As a consequence of these
differences, while the Brahmins of India are, as a class, ignorant even of
their own sacred books, mentally slack, and full of a pretentious assurance,
the Chinese mandarin has the energy that comes from hard mental work. But
since his education so far has been almost entirely a scholarly study of the
classical Chinese literature, his influence has been entirely conservative.
Before the days of Alexander the Great, China had already formed itself and
set its feet in the way in which it was still walking in the year 1,000 A.D.
Invaders and dynasties had come and gone, but the routine of life of the
yellow civilization remained unchanged.

.. _mandarins: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mandarin_(bureaucrat)

The traditional Chinese social system recognized four main classes below the
priest-emperor.

(a) The literary class, which was equivalent partly to the officials of the
Western world and partly to its teachers and clerics. In the time of
Confucius its education included archery and horsemanship. Rites and music,
history and mathematics completed the "Six Accomplishments".

(b) The cultivators of the laud.

(c) The artisans.

(d) The mercantile class.

But since from the earliest times it has been the Chinese way to divide the
landed possessions of a man among all his sons, there has never been in
Chinese history any class of great landowners, renting their land to tenants,
such as most other countries have displayed. The Chinese land has always been
cut up into small holdings, which are chiefly freeholds, and cultivated
intensively. There are landlords in China who own one or a few farms and rent
them to tenants, but there are no great, permanent estates. When a patch of
land, by repeated division, is too small to sustain a man, it is sold to some
prospering neighbour, and the former owner drifts to one of the great towns
of China to join the mass of wage-earning workers there. In China, for many
centuries, there have been these masses of town population with scarcely any
property at all, men neither serfs nor slaves, but held to their daily work
by their utter impecuniousness. From such masses it is that the soldiers
needed by the Chinese Government are recruited, and also such gang labour as
has been needed for the making of canals, the building of walls, and the like
has been drawn. The war captive and the slave class play a smaller part in
Chinese history than in any more westerly record of these ages before the
Christian era.

One fact, we may note, is common to all these three stories of developing
social structure and that is the immense power exercised by the educated
class in the early stages before the crown or the commonalty began to read
and, consequently, to think for itself. In India, by reason of their
exclusiveness, the Brahmins, the educated class, retain their influence to
this day; over the masses of China, along entirely different lines and
because of the complexities of the written language, the mandarinate has
prevailed. The diversity of race and tradition in the more various and
eventful world of the West has delayed, and perhaps arrested for ever, any
parallel organization of the specially intellectual elements of society into
a class ascendancy. In the Western world, as we have already noted, education
early "slopped over", and soaked away out of the control of any special
class; it escaped from the limitation of castes, and priesthoods and
traditions into the general life of the community. Writing and reading had
been simplified down to a point when it was no longer possible to make a cult
and mystery of them. It may be due to the peculiar elaboration and difficulty
of the Chinese characters, rather than to any racial difference, that the
same thing did not happen to the same extent in China.

.. [#fn3] In the time of Confucius classes were much more fixed than later. Under
    the Han dynasty the competitive examination system was not yet established.
    Scholars were recommended for appointments by local dignitaries, etc. â€”L. Y. C.

