
18.8 A Summary of Five Thousand Years
================================================================
In these last six chapters we have traced in outline the whole process by
which, in the course of 5,000 or 6,000 years â€” that is to say, in something
between 150 and 200 generations?mankind passed from the stage of early
Neolithic husbandry, in which the primitive skin-clad family tribe reaped and
stored in their rude mud juts the wild-growing fodder and grain-bearing
grasses with sickles of stone, to the days of the fourth century B.C., when
all round the shores of the Mediterranean and up the Nile, and across Asia to
India, and again over the great alluvial area of China, spread the fields of
human cultivation and busy cities, great temples, and the coming and going of
human commerce. Galleys and lateen-sailed ships entered and left crowded
harbours, and made their careful way from headland to headland and from
headland to island, keeping always close to the land. Phoenician shipping
under Egyptian owners was making its way into the East Indies and perhaps
even further into the Pacific. Across the deserts of Africa and Arabia and
through Turkestan toiled the caravans with their remote trade; silk was
already coming from China, ivory from Central Africa, and tin from Britain to
the centres of this new life in the world. Men had learnt to weave fine
linen\ [#fn4]_ and delicate fabrics of coloured wool; they could bleach and dye;
they had iron as well as copper, bronze, silver, and gold; they had made the
most beautiful pottery and porcelain; there was hardly a variety of precious
stone in the world that they had not found and cut and polished; they could
read and write; divert the course of rivers, pile pyramids, and make walls a
thousand miles long. The fifty or sixty centuries in which all this had to be
achieved may seem a long time in comparison with the threescore and ten years
of a single human life, but it is utterly inconsiderable in comparison with
the stretches of geological time. Measuring backward from these Alexandrian
cities to the days of the first stone implements, the *rostro-carinata*
implements of the Pliocene Age, gives us an extent of time fully a hundred
times as long.

We have tried in this account, and with the help of maps and figures and time
charts, to give a just idea of the order and shape of these fifty or sixty
centuries. Our business is with that outline. We have named but a few names
of individuals; though henceforth the personal names must increase in number.
But the content of this outline that we have drawn here in a few diagrams and
charts cannot but touch the imagination. If only we could look closelier, we
should see through all these sixty centuries a procession of lives more and
more akin in their fashion to our own. We have shown how the naked
Paleolithic savage gave place to the Neolithic cultivator, a type of man
still to be found in the backward places of the world. We have given an
illustration of Sumerian soldiers copied from a carved stone that was set up
long before the days when the Semitic Sargon I conquered the land. Day by day
some busy brownish man carved those figures, and no doubt, whistled as he
carved. In those days the plain of the Egyptian delta was crowded with gangs
of swarthy workmen unloading the stone that had come down the Nile to add a
fresh course to the current pyramid. One might paint a thousand scenes from
those ages: of some hawker merchant in Egypt spreading his stock of
Babylonish garments before the eyes of some pretty, rich lady; of a
miscellaneous crowd swarming between the pylons to some temple festival at
Thebes; of an excited, dark-eyed audience of Cretans like the Spaniards of
today, watching a bull-fight, with the bull-fighters in trousers and tightly
girded, exactly like any contemporary bull-fighter; of children learning
their cuneiform signs?at Nippur the clay exercise tiles of a school have been
found; of a woman with a sick husband at home slipping into some great temple
in Carthage to make a vow for his recovery. Or perhaps it is a wild Greek
skin-clad and armed with a bronze axe, standing motionless on some Illyrian
mountain crest, struck with amazement at his first vision of a many-oared
Cretan galley crawling like a great insect across the amethystine mirror of
the Adriatic Sea. He went home to tell his folk a strange story of a monster,
Briareus with his hundred arms. Of millions of such stitches in each of these
200 generations is the fabric of this history woven. But unless they mark the
presence of a primary seam or join, we cannot pause now to examine any of
these stitches.

.. [#fn4] Damascus was already making Damask, and "Damasceining" steel.
