
39.10 The Political, Economic, and Social Disorganization Caused by the Great War
===================================================================================
The world in the year after the great war was like a man who has had some
vital surgical operation very roughly performed, and who is not yet sure whether
he can now go on living or whether he has not been so profoundly shocked and
injured that he will presently fall down and die. It was a world dazed and
stunned. German militarist imperialism had been defeated, but at an overwhelming
cost. It had come very near to victory. Everything went on, now that the strain
of the conflict had ceased, rather laxly, rather weakly, and with a gusty and
uncertain temper. There was a universal hunger for peace, a universal desire for
the lost safety and liberty and prosperity of pre-war times, without any power
of will to achieve and secure these things.

Just as with the Roman Republic under the long strain of the Punic War, so
now there had been a great release of violence and cruelty, and a profound
deterioration in financial and economic morality. Generous spirits had
sacrificed themselves freely to the urgent demands of the war, but the sly and
base of the worlds of business and money had watched the convulsive
opportunities of the time and secured a firm grip upon the resources and
political power of their countries. Everywhere men who would have been regarded
as shady adventurers before 1914 had acquired power and influence while better
men toiled unprofitably. Such men as Lord Rhondda, the British food controller,
killed themselves with hard work, while the war profiteer waxed rich and secured
his grip upon press and party organization.

In the course of the war there had been extraordinary experiments in
collective management in nearly all the belligerent countries. It was realized
that the common expedients of peacetime commerce, the haggling of the market,
the holding out for a favorable bargain, were incompatible with the swift needs
of warfare. Transport, fuel, food supply, and the distribution of the raw
materials not only of clothing, housing, and the like but of everything needed
for war munitions, had been brought under public control. No longer had farmers
been allowed to under- farm; cattle had been put upon deer parks and grasslands
ploughed up, with or without the owner's approval. Luxury building and
speculative company promotion had been restrained. In effect, a sort of
emergency socialist state had been established throughout belligerent Europe. It
was rough-and-ready and wasteful, but it was more effective than the tangled
incessant profit seeking, the cornering and forestalling and incoherent
productiveness of «private enterprise».

In the earlier years of the war there was a very widespread feeling of
brotherhood and the common interest in all the belligerent states. The common
men were everywhere sacrificing life and health for what they believed to be the
common good of the state. In return, it was promised, there would be less social
injustice after the war, a more universal devotion to the common welfare. In
Great Britain, for instance, Mr. Lloyd George was particularly insistent upon
his intention to make the after-war Britain «a land fit for heroes». He
foreshadowed the continuation of this new war communism into the peace period in
discourses of great fire and beauty. In Great Britain, there was created a
Ministry of Reconstruction, which was understood to be planning a new and more
generous social order, better labour conditions, better housing, extended
education, a complete and scientific revision of the economic system. Similar
hopes of a better world sustained the common soldiers of France and Germany and
Italy. It was premature disillusionment that caused the Russian collapse, So
that two mutually dangerous streams of anticipation were running through the
minds of men in Western Europe towards the end of the war. The rich and
adventurous men, and particularly the new war profiteers, were making their
plans to prevent such developments as that air transport should become a state
property, and to snatch back manufactures, shipping, land transport, the public
services generally, and the trade in staples from the hands of the commonweal
into the grip of private profit; they were securing possession of newspapers and
busying themselves with party caucuses and the like to that end; while the
masses of common men were looking forward naively to a new state, of society
planned almost entirely in their interest and according to generous general
ideas. The history of 1919 is largely the clash of these two streams of
anticipation. There was a, hasty selling off, by the «business» government in
control, of every remunerative public enterprise to private speculators. By the
middle of 1919 the labour masses throughout the world were manifestly
disappointed and in a, thoroughly bad temper. The British «Minister of
Reconstruction» and its foreign equivalents were exposed as a soothing sham. The
common man felt he had been cheated. There was to be no reconstruction, but only
a restoration of the old order-in the harsher form necessitated by the poverty
of the new time.

For four years the drama of the war had obscured the social question, which
had been developing in the Western civilizations, throughout the nineteenth
century. Now that the war was over, this question reappeared gaunt and bare, as
it had never been seen before.

And the irritations find hardships and the general insecurity of the new time
were exacerbated by a profound disturbance of currency and credit. Money, a
complicated growth of conventions rather than a system of values, had been
deprived within the belligerent countries of the support of a gold standard.
Gold had been retained only for international trade, and every government had
produced excessive quantities of paper money for domestic use. With the breaking
down of the wartime barriers the international exchange became a wildly
fluctuating confusion, a source of' distress to everyone except a few gamblers
and wily speculators. Prices rose and rose with an infuriating effect upon the
wage earner. On the one hand was the employer resisting his demands for more
pay; on the other hand, food, houseroom, and clothing were being steadily
cornered against him. And, which was the essential danger of the situation, he
had lost any confidence he had ever possessed that any patience or industrial
willingness he displayed would really alleviate the shortages and inconveniences
by which he suffered.

In the speeches of politicians towards the close of 1911 and the spring of
1920, there was manifest an increasing recognition of the fact that what is
called the capitalist system-the private ownership system that is, in which
private profit is the working incentive-was on its trial. It had to produce
general prosperity, they admitted, or it had to be revised. It is interesting to
note such a speech as that of Mr. Lloyd George, the British premier, delivered
on Saturday, December 6th, 1919. Mr. Lloyd George had had the education and
training of a Welsh solicitor; he entered politics early, find in the course of
a brilliant parliamentary career be had had few later opportunities for reading
and thought. But being a man of great natural shrewdness, he was expressing here
very accurately the ideas of the more intelligent of the businessmen and wealthy
men and ordinary citizens who supported him.

«There is a new challenge to civilization», he said. «What is it? It is
fundamental. It affects the whole fabric of society as we know it; it's
commerce, its trade, its industry, its finance, its social order-all are
involved in it. There are those who maintain that the prosperity and strength of
the country have been built up by the stimulating and invigorating appeal to
individual impulse, to individual action. That is one view. The State must
educate; the State must assist where necessary; the State must control where
necessary; the State must shield the weak against the arrogance of the strong;
but the life springs from individual impulse and energy. (Cheers.) That is one
view. What is the other? That private enterprise is a failure, tried, and found
wanting-a complete failure, a cruel failure. It must be rooted out, and the
community must take charge as a community, to produce, to distribute, as well as
to control.

«Those are great challenges for us to decide. We say that the ills of private
enterprise can be averted. They say, No, they cannot. No ameliorative, no
palliative, no restrictive, no remedial measure will avail. These evils are
inherent in the system. They are the fruit of the tree, and you must cut it
down.' That is the challenge we hear ringing through the civilized world today,
from ocean to ocean, through valley and plain. You hear it in the whining and
maniacal shrieking of the Bolshevists. You hear it in the loud, clear, but more
restrained tones of Congresses and Conferences. The Bolshevists would blow up
the fabric with high explosive, with horror. Others would pull down with the
crowbars and with cranks especially cranks. (Laughter.)

«Unemployment, with its injustice for the man who seeks and thirsts for
employment, who begs for labour and cannot get it, and who is punished for
failure he is not responsible for by the starvation of his children-that torture
is something that private enterprise ought to remedy for its own sake, (Cheers.)
Sweating, slums, the sense of semi-slavery in labour, must go. We must cultivate
a sense of manhood by treating men as men. If I and I say this deliberately if I
had to choose between this fabric I believe in, and allowing millions of men and
women and children to rot in its cellars, I would not hesitate one hour. That is
not the choice. Thank God it is not the choice. Private enterprise can produce
more, so that all men get a fair share of it . . ».\ [#fn3]_ 

Here, put into quasi-eloquent phrasing, and with a jest adapted to the mental
habits of the audience, we have the common-Sense view of the ordinary prosperous
man not only of Great Britain but also of America or France or Italy or
Germany.

In quality and tone it is a fair sample of British political thought in 1919.
The prevailing economic system has made us what we are, is the underlying idea;
and we do not want any process of social destruction to precede a renascence of
society, we do not want to experiment with the fundamentals of our social order.
Let us accept that. Adaptation, Mr. Lloyd George admitted, there had to be. Now
this occasion of his speaking was a year and a month after the Armistice, and
for all that period private enterprise had been failing to do all that Mr. Lloyd
George was so cheerfully promising it would do. The community was in urgent need
of houses. Throughout the war there had been a cessation not only of building
but also of repairs. The shortage of houses in the last months of 1919 amounted
to scores of thousands in Britain alone.\ [#fn4]_  Multitudes of people were living in
a state of exasperating congestion, and the most shameless profiteering in
apartments and houses was going on. It was a difficult, but not an impossible
situation. Given the same enthusiasm and energy and self-sacrifice that had
tided over the monstrous crisis of 1916, the far easier task of providing a
million houses could have been performed in a year or so. But there had been
corners in building materials, transport was in a disordered state, and it did
not pay private enterprise to build houses at any rents within the means of the
people who needed them. Private enterprise, therefore, so far from bothering
about the public need of housing, did nothing but corner and speculate in rents
and sub-letting. It now demanded grants in aid from the State in order to build
at a profit. And there was a great crowding and dislocation of goods at the
depots because there was insufficient road transport. There was an urgent want
of cheap automobiles to move about goods and workers. But private enterprise in
the automobile industry found it far more profitable to produce splendid and
costly cars for those whom the war had made rich. The ammunition factories built
with public money could have been converted very readily into factories for the
mass production of cheap automobiles, but private enterprise had insisted upon
these factories being sold by the State, and would neither meet the public need
itself nor let the State do so. So, too, with the world in the direst discomfort
for need of shipping, private enterprise insisted upon the shutting down of the
newly constructed State shipyards.

Currency was dislocated everywhere, but private enterprise was busy buying
and selling francs or marks and intensifying the trouble. While Mr. George was
making the very characteristic speech we have quoted, the discontent of the
common man was gathering everywhere, and little or nothing was being done to
satisfy his needs. It was becoming very evident that unless there-was to be some
profound change in the spirit of business, under an unrestrained private
enterprise system there was little or no hope, in Europe at any rate, of decent
housing, clothing, or education for the workers for two or three
generations.

These are facts that the historian of mankind is obliged to note with as
little comment as possible. Private enterprise in Europe in 1919 and 1920
displayed neither will nor capacity for meeting the crying needs of the time. So
soon as it was released from control, it ran naturally into speculation,
cornering, and luxury production. It followed the line of maximum profit. It
displayed no sense of its own dangers; and it resisted any attempt to restrain
and moderate its profits and make itself serviceable, even in its own interest.
And this went on in the face of the most striking manifestations of the extreme
recalcitrance on the part of the European masses to the prolonged continuance of
the privations and inconveniences they suffered. In 1913 these masses were
living as they had lived since birth; they were habituated to the life they led.
The masses of 1919, on the other hand, had been uprooted, everywhere, to go into
the armies, to go into ammunition factories, and so on. They had lost their
habits of acquiescence, and they were hardier and more capable of desperate
action. Great multitudes of men had gone through such brutalizing training as,
for instance, bayonet drill; they had learnt to be ferocious, and to think less
either of killing or being killed. Social unrest had become, therefore, much
more dangerous. Everything seemed to point to a refusal to tolerate the current
state of affairs for many years. Unless the educated and prosperous and
comfortable people of Europe could speedily get their private enterprise under
sufficient restraint to make it work well and rapidly for the common good,
unless they could develop the idea of business as primarily a form of public
service and not primarily a method of profit-making, unless they could in their
own interest achieve a security of peace that would admit of a cessation not
only of war preparation, but of international commercial warfare, strike and
insurrection promised to follow strike and insurrection tip to a complete social
and political collapse. It was not that the masses had or imagined that they had
the plan of a new social, political, and economic system. They had not, and they
did not believe they had. The defects we have pointed out in the socialist
scheme (Chapter XXXVIII, sec 5) were no secret from them. It was a much more
dangerous state of affairs than that. It was that they were becoming so
disgusted with the current system, with its silly luxury, its universal waste,
and its general misery, that they did not care what happened afterward so long
as they could destroy it. It was a return to a state of mind comparable to which
had rendered possible the debacle of the Roman Empire.

Already in 1919 the world had seen one great community go that way, the
Russian people. The Russians overturned the old order and submitted to the
autocratic rule of a small group of doctrinaire Bolshevik socialists, because
these men seemed to have something new to try. They wrecked the old system, and
at any cost they would not have it back. The information available from Russia
at the time of writing this summary is still too conflicting and too obviously
tainted by propagandist aims for us to form any judgment upon the proceedings
and methods of the Soviet Government, but it is very plain that from November,
1917, Russia has not only endured that government and its mainly socialistic
methods, but has fought for it successfully against anything that seemed to
threaten a return to the old régime.

We have already (sec5) pointed out the very broad differences between the
Russian and the Western communities, and the strong reasons there are for
doubting that they will move upon parallel lines and act in similar ways. The
Russian peasants were cut off by want of education and sympathy from the small
civilized community of prosperous and educated people, which lived upon them.
These latter were a little separate nation. The peasants below, under the really
quite alien incitement of the Bolshevik socialists, have thrown that separate
nation off and destroyed it. In the towns, and in the towns alone, communism
rules (1920); the rest of Russia is now no more than a wilderness of barbaric
peasantry, but there is much more unity of thought and feeling between class and
class in the west than in Russia, and particularly in the Atlantic communities.
Even if they wrangle, classes can talk together and understand each other. There
is no unbroken stratum, of illiterates. The groups of rich and speculative men,
the «bad men» in business and affairs, whose freedoms are making the very name
of «private enterprise» stink in the nostrils of the ordinary man, are only the
more active section of very much larger classes, guilty perhaps of indolence and
self-indulgence, but capable of being roused to a sense not merely of the
wickedness but of the danger of systematic self-seeking in a strained,
impoverished, and sorely tried world.

In one way or another it seems inevitable now that the new standard of well
being which the mechanical revolution of the last century has rendered possible,
should become the general standard of life. Revolution is conditional upon
public discomfort. Social peace is impossible without a rapid amelioration of
the needless discomforts of the present time. A rapid resort to willing service
and social reconstruction on the part of those who own and rule, or else a
world-wide social revolution leading towards an equalization of conditions and
an attempt to secure comfort on new and untried lines, seem now to be the only
alternatives before mankind. The choice which route shall be taken lies, we
believe, in Western Europe, and still more so in America, with the educated,
possessing, and influential classes. The former route demands much sacrifice,
for prosperous people in particular, a voluntary assumption of public duties and
a voluntary acceptance of class discipline and self-denial; the latter may take
an indefinite time to traverse, it will certainly be a very destructive and
bloody process, and whether it will lead to a new and better state of affairs at
last is questionable. A social revolution, if ultimately the Western European
States blunder into it, may prove to be a process extending over centuries; it
may involve a social breakdown as complete as that of the Roman Empire, and it
may necessitate as slow recuperation.

.. [#fn3] The Times, December 8th, 1915.
.. [#fn4] Authorities vary between 250,000 and a million houses.
