
39.11 President Wilson and the problems of Versailles
========================================================================

.. _Figure 1066:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/1066.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/1066.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 1066

    Figure 1066: President Wilson

We have dealt with the social and economic disorder of the European
communities, and the rapid return of the «class-war» to the foreground of
attention, before giving any account of the work of world settlement that
centered on the Peace Conference at Paris, because the worried and preoccupied
state of everyone concerned with private problems of income, prices, employment,
and the like goes far to explain the jaded atmosphere in which -that Conference
addressed itself to the vast task before it.

The story of the Conference turns very largely upon the adventure of one
particular man, one of those men whom accident or personal quality picks, out as
a type to lighten the task of the historian. We have in the course of this
history found it very helpful at times to focus our attention upon some
individual, Buddha, Alexander the Great, Yuan Chwang, the Emperor Frederick II
and Charles V and Napoleon I for example, and to let him by reflection
illuminate the period in which he lived. The conclusion of the Great War can be
seen most easily as the rise of the American President, President Wilson, to
predominant importance in the world's hopes and attention, and his failure to
justify that predominance.

President Wilson (born 1856) had previously been a prominent student and
teacher of history, constitutional law, and the political sciences generally. He
had held various professorial chairs, and had been President of Princeton
University (New Jersey). There is a long list of books to his credit, and they
show a mind rather exclusively directed to American history and American
politics. He was mentally the new thing in history, negligent of and rather
ignorant of the older things out of which his new world had arisen. He retired
from academic life, and was elected Democratic Governor of New Jersey in 1910.
In 1913 he became the Democratic presidential candidate, and as a consequence of
a violent quarrel between ex-President Roosevelt and President Taft, which split
the dominant Republican party he became President of the United States.

The events of August 1914, seem to have taken President Wilson, like the rest
of his fellow-countrymen, by surprise. We find him cabling an offer of his
services as a mediator on August 3rd. Then, for a time, he and America watched
the conflict, at first neither the American people nor their President seem to
have had a very clear or profound understanding of that long-gathered
catastrophe. Their tradition for a century had been to disregard the problems of
the Old World, and it was not to be lightly changed. The imperialistic arrogance
of the German Court and the stupid inclination of the German military
authorities towards melodramatic «frightfulness», their invasion of Belgium,
their cruelties there, their use of poison gas, and the nuisance of their
submarine campaign, created a deepening hostility to Germany in the United
States as the war proceeded; but the tradition of political abstinence and the
deep-rooted persuasion that America possessed a political morality altogether
superior to European conflicts, restrained the President from active
intervention. He adopted a lofty tone. He professed to be unable to judge the
causes and justice of the Great War. It was largely his high pacific attitude
that secured his re-election as President for a second term. But the world is
not to be mended by merely regarding evildoers with an expression of rather
undiscriminating disapproval. By the end of 1916 the Germans had been encouraged
to 'believe that under no circumstances whatever would the United States fight,
and in 1917 they began their unrestricted submarine warfare and the sinking of
American ships without notice. President Wilson and the American people were
dragged into the war by this, supreme folly. And also they were dragged into a
reluctant attempt to define their relations to Old World politics in some other
terms than those of mere aloofness. Their thoughts and temper changed very
rapidly. They came into the war side by side with the Allies, but not in any
pact with the Allies. They came into the war, in the name of their own modern
civilization, to punish and end an intolerable political and military
situation.

Slow and belated judgments are sometimes the best judgments. In a series of
«notes», too long and various for detailed treatment in this *Outline,*
thinking aloud, as it were, in the hearing of all mankind, President Wilson
sought to state the essential differences of the American State from the Great
Powers of the Old World. We have been at some pains in this history to make
plain the development of these differences. He unfolded a conception of
international relationships that came like a gospel, like the hope of a better
world, to the whole eastern hemisphere. Secret agreements were to cease,
«nations» were to determine their own destinies, and militarist aggression was
to cease the seaways were to be free to all mankind. These commonplaces of
American thought, these secret desires of every sane man, came like a great
light upon the darkness of anger and conflict in Europe. At last, men felt, the
ranks of diplomacy were broken the veils of Great Power «policy» were rent in
twain. Here with authority, with the strength of a powerful new nation behind
it, was the desire of the common man throughout the world, plainly said.

Manifestly there was needed some over-riding instrument of government to
establish world law and maintain these broad and liberal generalizations upon
human intercourse. A number of schemes had floated in men's minds for the
attainment of that end. In particular there was a movement for some sort of
world league, a «League of Nations». The American President adopted this phrase
and sought to realize it. An essential condition of the peace he sought through
the overthrow of German imperialism was, he declared, to be this federal organ.
This League of Nations was to be the final court of appeal in international
affairs. It was to be the substantial realization of the peace. Here again he
awakened a tremendous echo.

President Wilson was the spokesman of a new age. Throughout the war, and for
some little time after it had ended, he held, so far as the Old World was
concerned, that exalted position. But in America, where they knew him better
there were doubts and writing as we do now with the wisdom of subsequent events,
we can understand these doubts. America, throughout a century and more of
detachment and security, had developed new ideals and formula of political
thought, without realizing with any intensity that, under conditions of stress
and danger, these ideals and formula, might have to be passionately sustained.
To her community many things were platitudes that had to the Old World
communities, entangled still in ancient political complications, the quality of
a saving gospel. President Wilson was responding to the thought and conditions
of his own people and his own country, based on a liberal tradition that had
first found its full expression in English speech; but to Europe and Asia he
seemed to be thinking and saying, for the first time in history, things hitherto
undeveloped and altogether secret. And that misconception he may have
shared.

We are dealing here with an able and successful professor of political
science, who did not fully realize what he owed to his contemporaries and the
literary and political atmosphere he had breathed throughout his life; and who
passed very rapidly, after his re-election as President, from the mental
attitudes of a, political leader to those of a Messiah. His «notes» are a series
of explorations of the elements of the world situation. When at last in his
address to Congress of January 8th, 1918, he produced his Fourteen Points as a
definite statement of the American peace intentions, they were, as a statement,
far better in their spirit than in their arrangement and matter. This document
demanded open agreements between nations and an end to secret diplomacy, free
navigation of the high seas, free commerce, disarmament, and a number of
political readjustment's upon the lines of national independence. Finally in the
Fourteenth Point it required «a general association of nations» to guarantee the
peace of the world.

These Fourteen Points had an immense reception throughout the world here at
last seemed a peace for reasonable men everywhere, as good and acceptable to
honest and decent Germans and Russians, as to honest and decent Frenchmen and
Englishmen and Belgians; and for some Months the whole world was lit by faith in
Wilson. Could they have been made the basis of a world settlement in 1919, they
would forthwith have opened a new and more hopeful era in human affairs.

But, as we must tell, they did not do that. There was about President Wilson
a certain egotism; there was in the generation of people in the United States to
whom this great occasion came, a generation born in security, reared in plenty
and, so far as history goes, in ignorance, a generation remote from the tragic
issues that had made Europe grave, a certain superficiality and lightness of
mind. It was not that the American people were superficial by nature and
necessity, but that they had never been deeply, stirred by the idea of a human
community larger than their, own. It was an intellectual but not a moral
conviction with them. One had on the one hand these new people of the new world,
with their new ideas, their finer and better ideas, of peace and world
righteousness and on the other the old, bitter, deeply entangled peoples of the
Great Power system; and the former were crude and rather childish in their
immense inexperience, and the latter were seasoned and bitter and intricate. The
theme of this clash of the raw idealist youthfulness of a new age with the
experienced ripeness of the old, was treated years ago by that great novelist,
Henry James, in a very typical story called *Daisy Miller.* It is the
pathetic story of a frank, trustful, high-minded, but rather simple-minded
American girl, with a real disposition towards righteousness and a great desire
for a «good time», and how she came to Europe and was swiftly entangled and put
in the wrong, and at last driven to welcome death by the complex tortuousness
and obstinate limitations of the older world. There have been a thousand
variants of that theme in real life, a thousand such trans-Atlantic tragedies,
and the story of President Wilson is one of them. But it is not to be supposed,
because the new thing succumbs to the old infections, that is the final
condemnation of the new thing.

Probably no fallible human being manifestly trying to do his best amidst
overwhelming circumstances has been subjected to such minute, searching, and
pitiless criticism as President Wilson. He is blamed and it would seem that he
is rightly blamed, for conducting the war and the ensuing peace negotiations on
strictly party lines. He remained the President representing the American
Democratic Party, when circumstances conspired to make him the representative of
the general interests of mankind. He made no attempt to forget party issues for
a time, and to incorporate with himself such great American leader as
ex-President, Roosevelt, ex-President Taft, and the like. He did not draw fully
upon the moral and intellectual resources of the States; he made the whole issue
too personal, and he surrounded himself with merely personal adherents. And a
still graver error was his decision to come to the Peace Conference himself.
Nearly every experienced critic seems to be of opinion that be should have
remained in America, in the role of America, speaking occasionally as if a
nation spoke. Throughout the concluding years of the war he had by that method
achieved an unexampled position in the world.

Says Dr. Dillon\ [#fn5]_  «Europe, when the President touched its shores, was as
clay ready for the creative potter.

Never before were the nations so eager to follow a Moses who would take them
to the long-promised land where wars are prohibited and blockades unknown. And
to their thinking he was that great leader. In France men bowed down before him
with awe and affection labour leaders in Paris told me that they shed tears of
joy in his presence, and that their comrades would go, through fire and water to
help him to realize his noble schemes. To the working classes in Italy his name
was a heavenly clarion at the sound of which the earth would be renewed. The
Germans regarded him and his humane doctrine as their sheet anchor of safety.
The fearless Herr Muehlon said: If President Wilson were to address the Germans,
and pronounce a severe sentence upon them, they would accept it with resignation
and without a murmur and set to work at once. In German-Austria, his fame was
that of a savior, and the mere mention of his name brought calm to the suffering
and surcease of sorrow to the afflicted. . . ».

Such was the overpowering expectation of the audience to which President
Wilson prepared to show himself. He reached France on board the *George
Washington* in December 1918.

He brought his wife with him. That seemed no doubt a perfectly natural and
proper thing to an American mind. Quite a number of the American representatives
brought their wives. Unhappily a social quality, nay, almost a tourist quality,
was introduced into the world settlement by these ladies. Transport facilities
were limited, and most of them arrived in Europe with a radiant air of
privilege. They came as if they came to a treat. They were it was intimated,
seeing Europe under exceptional interesting circumstances. They would visit
Chester, or Warwick, or Windsor *en* route-for they might not have a chance
of seeing these celebrated places again. Important interviews would be broken
off to get in a visit to some «old historical mansion». This may seem a trivial
matter to note in a History of Mankind, but it was such small human things as
this that threw a miasma of futility over the Peace Conference of 1919. In a
little while one discovered that Wilson, the Hope of Mankind, had vanished, and
that all the illustrated fashion papers contained pictures of a delighted
tourist and his wife, grouped smilingly with crowned beads and such-like
enviable company . . . It is so easy to be wise after the event, and to perceive
that he should not have come over.

.. _Figure 1067:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/1067.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/1067.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 1067

    Figure 1067: M. Clemenceau

The men he had chiefly to deal with, for example M. Clemenceau (France), Mr.
Lloyd George and, Mr. Balfour (Britain), Baron Sonnino and Signor Orlando
(Italy), were men of widely dissimilar historical traditions. But in one respect
they resembled him and appealed to his sympathies. They, too, were party
politicians, who had led their country through the war. Like him they had failed
to grasp the necessity of entrusting the work of settlement to more specially
qualified men. «They were the merest novices in international affairs.
Geography, ethnology, psychology, and, political history were sealed books to
them. Like the Rector of Louvain University, who told Oliver Goldsmith that, as
he had become the bead of that institution without knowing Greek, he failed to
see why it should be taught there, the chiefs of State, having obtained the
highest position in their respective countries without more than an inkling of
international affairs, were unable to realize the importance of mastering them
or the impossibility of repairing the omission as they went along . . . »
\ [#fn6]_ 

«What they lacked, however, might in some perceptible degree have been
supplied by enlisting as their helpers men more happily endowed than themselves.
But they deliberately chose mediocrities. It is a mark of genial spirits that
they are well served, but the plenipotentiaries of the Conference were not
characterized by it. Away in the background some of them, had familiars or
casual prompters to whose counsels they were wont to listen, but many of the
adjoints, who moved in the limelight of the world-stage were gritless and pith
less.

«As the heads of the principal Governments implicitly claimed to be the
authorized spokesmen of the human race, and endowed with unlimited powers, it is
worth noting that this claim was boldly challenged by the people's organs in the
Press. Nearly all the journals read by the masses objected from the first to the
dictatorship of the group of Premiers, Mr. Wilson being excepted . . . »\ [#fn7]_ 

.. _Figure 1068:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/1068.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/1068.png
    :figclass: inline-figure left
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 1068

    Figure 1068: Mr. Lloyd George

The restriction upon our space in this *Outline* will not allow us to
tell here how the Peace Conference shrank from a Council of Ten to a Council of
Four (Wilson, Clemenceau, Lloyd George, and Orlando), and how it became a
conference less and less like a frank and open discussion of the future of
mankind, and more and more like some old-fashioned diplomatic conspiracy. Great
and wonderful had been the hopes that had gathered to Paris. «The Paris of the
Conference», says Dr. Dillon, «ceased to be the capital of France. It became a
vast cosmopolitan caravanserai teeming with unwanted aspects of life and
turmoil, filled with curious samples of the races, tribes, and tongues of four
continents that came to watch and wait for the mysterious tomorrow.

«An Arabian Nights' touch was imparted to the dissolving panorama by strange
visitants from Tartary and Kurdistan, Korea and Aderbeijan, Armenia, Persia, and
the Hedjazmen with patriarchal beards and scimitar-shaped noses, and others from
desert and oasis, from Samarkand and Bokhara. Turbans and fezes, sugar-loaf hats
and head-gear resembling episcopal mitres, old military uniforms devised for the
embryonic armies of new states on the eve of perpetual peace, snowywhite
burnouses, flowing mantles, and graceful garments like the Roman toga,
contributed to create an atmosphere of dreamy unreality in the city where the
grimmest of realities were being faced and coped with.

«Then came the men of Wealth, of intellect, of industrial enterprise, and the
seed-bearers of the ethical new ordering, members of economic committees from
the United States, Britain, Italy, Poland, Russia, India, and Japan,
representatives of naphtha industries and far-off coal mines, pilgrims, fanatics
and charlatans from all climes, priests of all religions, preachers of every
doctrine, who mingled with princes, field marshals, statesmen, anarchists,
builders-up and pullers-down. All of them burned with desire to be near to the
crucible in which the political and social systems of the world were to be
melted and recast. Every day, in my walks, in my apartment, or at restaurants, I
met emissaries from lands and peoples whose very names had seldom been heard of
before in the West. A delegation from the Pont-Euxine Greeks called on me, and
discoursed of their ancient cities of Trebizond, Samsoun, Tripoli, Kerassund, in
which I resided many years ago, and informed me that they, too, desired to
become welded into an independent Greek Republic, and had come to have their
claims allowed. The Albanians were represented by my old friend Turkhan Pasha,
on the one hand, and by my friend Essad Pasha on the other-the former desirous
of Italy's protection, the latter demanding complete independence. Chinamen,
Japanese, Koreans, Hindus, Kirghizes, Lesghieus, Cireassians, Mingrelians,
Buryats, Malays, and «Negroes and Negroids from Africa and America were among
the tribes and tongues foregathered in Paris to watch the rebuilding of the
political world system and to see where they 'came in.' . . ».

To this thronging, amazing Paris, agape for a new world, came President
Wilson, and found its gathering forces dominated by a personality narrower, in
every way more limited and beyond comparison more forcible than himself: the
French Premier, M. Clemenceau. At the instance of President Wilson, M.
Clemenceau was elected President of the Conference. «It was», said President
Wilson, «a special tribute to the sufferings and sacrifices of France». And
that, unhappily, sounded the keynote of the Conference, whose sole business
should have been with the future of mankind.

Georges Benjamin Clemenceau was an old journalist politician, a great
denouncer of abuses, a great up setter of governments, a doctor who had, while a
municipal councilor, kept a free clinic, and a fierce, experienced duelist. None
of his duels ended fatally, but he faced them with great intrepidity. He had
passed from the medical school to republican journalism in the days of the
Empire. In those days he was an extremist of the left. He was for a time a
teacher in America, and he married and divorced an American wife. He was thirty
in the eventful year 1871. He returned to France after Sedan, and flung himself
into the stormy politics of the defeated nation with great fire and vigor.
Thereafter France was his world, the France of vigorous journalism,
high-spirited personal quarrels challenges, confrontations, scenes, dramatic
effects, and witticisms at any cost. He was what people call «fierce stuff», he
was nicknamed the «Tiger», and he seems to have been rather proud of his
nickname. Professional patriot rather than statesman and thinker, this was the
man whom the war had flung up to misrepresent the fine mind and the generous
spirit of France. His limitations had a profound effect upon the conference,
which was further colored by the dramatic resort for the purpose of signature to
the very Hall of Mirrors at Versailles in which Germany had triumphed and
proclaimed her unity. There the Germans were to sign. To M. Clemenceau, and to
France, in that atmosphere, the war ceased to seem a world war; it was merely
the sequel of the previous conflict of the Terrible Year, the downfall and
punishment of offending Germany. «The world had to be made safe for democracy»,
said President Wilson. That from M. Clemenceau's expressed point of view was
«talking like Jesus Christ». The world had to be made safe for Paris «Talking
like Jesus Christ» seemed a very ridiculous thing to many of those brilliant
rather than sound diplomatists and politicians who made the year 1919 supreme in
the history of human insufficiency.

(Another flash of the «Tiger's» wit, it may be noted, was that President
Wilson with his fourteen points, was «worse» than God Almighty. «Le bon Dieu»
only had ten . . .) M. Clemenceau sat with Signor Orlando in the more central
chairs of a semicircle of four in front of the fire, says Keynes. He wore a
black frock-coat and gray suede gloves, which he never removed during these
sessions. He was, it is to be 'noted, the only one of these four reconstructors
of the world who could understand and speak both French and English.

The aims of M. Clemenceau were simple and in a manner attainable. He wanted
all the settlement of 1871 undone. He wanted Germany punished as though she was
a uniquely sinful nation and France a sinless martyr land. He wanted Germany so
crippled and devastated as never more to be able to stand up to France. He
wanted to hurt and humiliate Germany more than France had been hurt and
humiliated in 1871. He did not care if in breaking Germany Europe was broken;
his mind did not go far enough beyond the Rhine to understand that possibility.
He accepted President Wilson's League of Nations as an excellent proposal if it
would guarantee the security of France whatever she did, but he preferred a
binding alliance of the United States and England to maintain, uphold, and
glorify France under practically any circumstances. He wanted wider
opportunities for the exploitation of Syria, North Africa, and so forth by
Parisian financial groups. He wanted indemnities to recuperate France, loans,
gifts, and tributes to France, glory and homage to France. France had suffered,
and France had to be rewarded. Belgium, Russia, Serbia, Poland, Armenia,
Britain, Germany, and Austria had all suffered too, all mankind had suffered,
but what would you? That was not his affair. These were the supers of a drama in
which France was for him the star . . . In much the same spirit Signor Orlando
seems to have sought the welfare of Italy.

Mr. Lloyd George brought to the Council of Four the subtlety of a Welshman,
the intricacy of a European, and an urgent necessity for respecting the
nationalist egotism of the British imperialists and capitalists who had returned
him to power. Into the secrecy of that council went President Wilson with the
very noblest aims for his newly discovered American world policy, his rather
hastily compiled Fourteen Points, and a project rather than a scheme for a
League of Nations.

«There can seldom have been a statesman of the first rank more incompetent
than the President in the agilities of the Council Chamber». From the whispering
dark nesses and fireside disputes of that council, and after various comings and
goings we cannot here describe, he emerged at last with his Fourteen Points
pitifully torn and disheveled, but with a little puling infant of a League of
Nations, which might die or which might live and grow-no one could tell. This
history cannot tell. We are at the end of our term. But that much, at least, he
had saved . . .

.. [#fn5] In his book, :t:`The Peace Conference`.
.. [#fn6] Dillon.
.. [#fn7] Dillon. And see his :t:`The Peace Conference`, chapter iii, for instances of the amazing ignorance of the various delegates.
