
39.12 Summary of the First Covenant of the League of Nations
========================================================================

.. _Figure 1075:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/1075.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/1075.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 1075

    Figure 1075: Map of Germany after the Peace Treaty of 1919

This homunculus in a bottle which it was hoped might become at last Man
ruling the Earth, this League of Nations as it was embodied in the Covenant of
April 28th, 1919, was not a league of peoples at all; it was the world
discovered, a league of «states, dominions, or colonies». It was stipulated that
these should be «fully self-governing», but there was no definition whatever of
this phrase. There was no bar to a limited franchise and no provision for any
direct control by the people of any state. India figured-presumably as a «fully
self-governing state», an autocracy would no doubt have been admissible as a
«fully self- governing» democracy with a franchise limited to one person. The
League of the Covenant of 1919 was, in fact, a league of «representatives» of
foreign offices, and it did not even abolish the nonsense of embassies at every
capital. The British Empire appeared once as a whole, and then India (!) and the
four dominions of Canada, Australia, South Africa, and New Zealand appeared as
separate sovereign states. The Indian representative was, of course, sure to be
merely a British nominee; the other four would be colonial politicians. But if
the British Empire was to be thus dissected, a representative of Great Britain
should have been substituted for the Imperial representative, and Ireland and
Egypt should also have been given representation. Moreover, either New York
State or Virginia was historically and legally almost as much a sovereign state
as New Zealand or Canada. The inclusion of India raised logical claims for
French Africa and French Asia. One French representative did propose a separate
vote for the little principality of Monaco.

There was to be an assembly of the League in which every member state was to
be represented and to have an equal voice, but the working directorate of the
League was to vest in a Council, which was to consist of the representatives of
the United States, Britain, France, Italy, and Japan, with four other members
elected by the Assembly. The Council was to meet once a year; the gatherings of
the Assembly were to be at «stated intervals», not stated.

Except in certain specified instances the league of this Covenant could make
only unanimous decisions. One dissentient on the council could bar any
proposal-on the lines of the old *Polish liberum veto,* (Chapter XXXV, sec
7). This was a quite disastrous provision. To many minds it made the Covenant
League rather less desirable than no league at all. It was a complete
recognition of the unalienable sovereignty of states, and a repudiation of the
idea of an overriding commonweal of mankind. This provision practically barred
the way to all amendments to the league constitution in future except by the
clumsy expedient of a simultaneous withdrawal of the majority of member states
desiring a change, to form the league again on new lines, The covenant made
inevitable such a final winding-up of the league it created, and that was
perhaps the best thing about it.

The following powers, it was proposed, should be excluded from the original
league: Germany, Austria, Russia, and whatever remains there were of the Turkish
Empire. But any of these might subsequently be included with the assent of
two-thirds of the Assembly. The original membership of the league as specified
in the projected Covenant was: the United States of America, Belgium, Bolivia,
Brazil, the British Empire (Canada, Australia, South Africa, New Zealand, and
India), China, Cuba, Ecuador, France, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, the Hedjaz,
Honduras, Italy, Japan, Liberia, Nicaragua, Panama, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Rumania, the Serb-Croat-Slovene State, Siam, Czecho-Slovakia, and Uruguay. To
which were to be added by invitation the following powers which had been neutral
in the war: the Argentine Republic, Chile, Colombia, Denmark, Holland, Norway,
Paraguay, Persia, Salvador, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and Venezuela.

Such being the constitution of the league, it is scarcely to be wondered at
that its powers were special and limited. It was given a seat at Geneva and a
secretariat. It had no powers even to inspect the military preparations of its
constituent states, or to instruct a military and naval staff to plan out the
armed co- operation needed to keep the peace of the world. The French
representative in the League of Nations Commission, M. Leon Bourgeois, insisted
lucidly and repeatedly on the logical necessity of such powers. As a speaker he
was rather copious and lacking in «spice» of the Clemenceau quality. The final
scene in the plenary session of April 28th, before the adoption of the Covenant,
is described compactly by Mr. Wilson Harris, the crowded Banqueting Hall at the
Quai d'Orsay, with its «E» of tables for the delegates, with secretaries and
officials lining the walls and a solid mass of journalists at the lower end of
the room. «At the head of the room the 'Big Three' diverted themselves in
undertones at the expense of the worthy M. Bourgeois, now launched, with the
help of what must have been an entirely superfluous sheaf of notes, on the fifth
rendering of his speech in support of his famous amendments».

They were so often «diverting themselves in undertones», those three men whom
God had mocked with the most tremendous opportunity in history. Keynes (op.
cit.) gives other instances of the levities, vulgarities, disregards,
inattentions, and inadequacies of these meetings.

This poor covenant arrived at in this fashion returned with President Wilson
to America, and there it was subjected to an amount of opposition, criticism,
and revision which showed, among other things, how relatively unimpaired was the
mental energy of the United States. The Senate refused to ratify the covenant,
and the first meeting of the League Council was held therefore without American
representatives. The close of 1919 and the opening months of 1920 saw a very
curious change come over American feeling after the pro-French and pro-British
enthusiasms of the war period. The peace negotiations reminded the Americans, in
a confused and very irritating way, of their profound differences in
international outlook from any European power that the war had for a time helped
them to forget. They felt they had been «rushed» into many things without due
consideration. They experienced a violent revulsion towards that policy of
isolation that had broken down in 1917. The close of 1919 saw a phase, a very
understandable phase of passionate and even violent «Americanism», in which
European imperialism and European socialism were equally anathema. There may
have been a sordid element in the American disposition to «cut» the moral
responsibilities the United States had incurred in the affairs of the Old World,
and to realize the enormous financial and political advantages the war had given
the new world; but the broad instinct of the American people seems to have been
sound in its distrust of the proposed settlement.

