
39.13 A General Outline of the Treaties of 1919 and 1920
========================================================================

.. _Figure 1077:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/1077.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/1077.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 1077

    Figure 1077: Map — The Turkish Treaty, 1920

The main terms of the Treaties of 1919-20 with which the Conference of Paris
concluded its labors can be stated much more vividly by a few maps than by a
written abstract. We need scarcely point out how much those treaties, left
unsettled, but we may perhaps enumerate some of the more salient breaches of the
Twelve that survived out of the Fourteen Points at the opening of the
Conference.

One initial cause of nearly all those breaches lay, we believe, in the
complete unpreparedness and unwillingness of that preexisting league of nations,
subjected states and exploited areas, the British Empire, to submit to any
dissection and adaptation of its system or to any control of its naval and
aerial armament. A kindred contributory cause was the equal unpreparedness of
the American mind for any interference with the ascendancy of the United States
in the New World (compare Secretary Olney's declaration in this chapter, sec 6).
Neither of those Great Powers, who were necessarily dominant and leading powers
at Paris, had properly thought out the implications of a League of Nations in
relation to these older arrangements, and so their support of that project had
to most European observers a curiously hypocritical air; it was as if they
wished to retain and ensure their own vast predominance and security while at
the same time restraining any other power from such expansions, annexations, and
alliances as might create a rival and competitive imperialism. Their failure to
set an example of international confidence destroyed all possibility of
international confidence in the other nations represented at Paris.

Even more unfortunate was the refusal of the Americans to assent to the
Japanese demand for recognition of racial equality.

Moreover, the foreign offices of the British, the French, and the Italians
were haunted by traditional schemes of aggression entirely incompatible with the
new ideas. A League of Nations that is to be of any appreciable value to mankind
must supersede imperialisms; it is either a super-imperialism, a liberal
world-empire of united states, participant or in tutelage, or it is nothing; but
few of the people at the Paris Conference had the mental vigor even to assert
this obvious consequence of the League proposal. They wanted to be at the same
time bound and free, to ensure peace forever, but to keep their weapons in their
hands. Accordingly the old annexation projects of the Great Power period were
hastily and thinly camouflaged as proposed acts of this poor little birth of
April 28th. The newly born and barely animate League was represented to be
distributing, with all the reckless munificence of a captive pope, «mandates» to
the old imperialisms that, had it been the young Hercules we desired, it would
certainly have strangled in its cradle.

Britain was to have extensive «mandates» in Mesopotamia and East Africa;
France was to have the same in Syria; Italy was to have all her holdings to the
west and southeast of Egypt consolidated as mandatory territory. Clearly, if the
weak thing that was being nursed by its Secretary in its cradle at Geneva into
some semblance of life, did presently succumb to the, infantile weakness of all
institutions born without passion, all these «mandates» would become frank
annexations. Moreover, all the Powers fought tooth and nail at the Conference
for «strategic» frontiers the ugliest symptom of all. Why should a state want a
strategic frontier unless it contemplates war? If on that plea Italy insisted
upon a subject population of Germans in the southern Tyrol and a subject
population of Yugo-Slavs in Dalmatia, and if little Greece began landing troops
in Asia Minor, neither France nor Britain was in a position to rebuke these
outbreaks of pre- millennial method.

.. _Figure 1079:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/1079.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/1079.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 1079

    Figure 1079: Map — Breakup of Austia-Hungary

We will not enter here into any detailed account of how President Wilson gave
way to the Japanese and consented to their replacing the Germans at Kiau Chau,
which is Chinese property, how the almost purely German city of Danzig was
practically, if not legally, annexed, to Poland, and how the Powers disputed
over the claim of the Italian imperialists, a claim strengthened by these
instances, to seize the Yugo-Slav port of Fiume and deprive the Yugo-Slavs of a
good Adriatic outlet. Nor will we do more than note the complex arrangements and
justifications that put the French in possession of the Saar valley, which is
German territory, or the entirely iniquitous breach of the right of
«self-determination» which practically forbade German Austria to unite as it is
natural and proper that she should unite with the rest of Germany. These burning
questions of 1919-20, which occupied the newspapers and the minds of statesmen
and politicians, and filled all our wastepaper baskets with propaganda
literature, may seem presently very incidental things in the larger movement of
these times. All these disputes, like the suspicions and tetchy injustices of a
weary and irritated man, may lose their importance as the tone of the world
improves, and the still inadequately apprehended lessons of the Great War and
the Petty Peace that followed it begin to be digested by the general
intelligence of mankind.

It is worthwhile for the reader to compare the treaty maps we give with what
we have called the natural political map of Europe. The new arrangements do
approach this latter more closely than any previous system of boundaries. It may
be a necessary preliminary to any satisfactory league of peoples that each
people should first be in something like complete possession of its own
household.

