
39.14 A Forecast of the Next War
========================================================================
The failure to produce a more satisfactory world settlement in 1919-20 was,
we have suggested, a symptom of an almost universal intellectual and moral
lassitude resulting from the overstrain of the Great War. A lack of fresh
initiative is characteristic of a fatigue phase; everyone, for sheer inability
to change, drifts on for a time along the lines of mental habit and
precedent.

Nothing could be more illustrative of this fatigue inertia than the expressed
ideas of military men at this time. It will round off this chapter in an
entirely significant way, and complete our picture of the immense world
interrogation on which our history must end, if we give here the briefest
summary of a lecture that was delivered to a gathering of field-marshals,
generals, major- generals, and the like by Major-General Sir Louis Jackson at
the Royal United Service Institution in London one day in December, 1919. Lord
Peel, the British Undersecretary for War, presided, and the reader must picture
to himself the not too large and quite dignified room of assembly in that
building, and all these fine, grave, Soldierly figures quietly intent upon the
lecturer's words. He is describing, with a certain subdued enthusiasm, the
probable technical developments of military method in the «next war».

Outside, through the evening twilight of Whitehall, flows the London traffic,
not quite so abundant as in 1914, but still fairly abundant; the omnibuses all
overcrowded because there are now not nearly enough of them, and the clothing of
people generally shabbier. Some little way down Whitehall is a temporary
erection, the Cenotaph, with its base smothered with a vast pathetic heap of
decaying wreaths, bunches of flowers, and the like, a cenotaph to commemorate
the eight hundred thousand young men of the Empire who have been killed in the
recent struggle. A few people are putting fresh flowers and wreaths there. One
or two are crying.

The prospect stretches out beyond this gathering into the gray vastness of
London, where people are now crowded as they have never been crowded before,
whose food is dear and employment more uncertain than it has ever been. But let
not the spectacle be one of unrelieved gloom; Regent Street, Oxford Street, and
Bond Street are bright with shoppers and congested with new automobiles, because
we must remember that everybody does not lose by a war. Beyond London the
country sinks into -night, and across the narrow sea are North France and
Belgium devastated, Germany with scores of thousands of her infants dwindling
and dying for want of milk, all Austria starving. Half the population of Vienna,
it is believed unless American relief comes quickly, is doomed to die of
hardship before the spring. Beyond that bleak twilight stretches the darkness of
Russia. There, at least, no rich people are buying anything, and no military men
are reading essays on the next war. But in icy Petrograd is little food, little
wood, and no coal. All the towns of Russia southward as far as the snow reaches
are in a similar plight, and in the Ukraine and to the south a ragged and dingy
war drags to its end. Europe is bankrupt, and people's pockets rustle with paper
money whose purchasing power dwindles as they walk about with it.

But now we will return to Sir Louis in the well-lit room at the United
Service Institution.

He was of opinion—we follow the report in next morning's Times\ [#fn8]_ —that we
were merely on the eve of the, most extensive modifications of the art of war
known to history. It behooved us, therefore-us being, of course, the British and
not the whole of mankind-to get on with our armaments and to keep ahead; a fine
opening generalization. «It was necessary to develop new arms . . . The nation,
which best did so would have a great advantage in the next war. There were
people who were crying aloud for a reduction of armaments»

(But they're the Director of Trench Warfare and Supplies was wrong. They were
just crying at the cenotaph, poor, soft, and stupid souls; because a son or a
brother or a father was dead.)

Sir Louis believed that one of the greatest developments in the art of
warfare would be brought about in mechanical trans~- port. The tank he treated
with ingratitude. These military gentlemen are ungrateful to an invention, which
shoved and butted them into victory almost in spite of themselves. The tank,
said Sir Louis, was «a freak . . . The outstanding feature» of the tank, he
said, was that it made mechanical transport independent of the roads. Hitherto
armies on the march had only been able to spoil the roads; now their transport
on caterpillar wheels would advance in open order on a broad front carrying
guns, munitions, supplies, bridging equipment, rafts, and men and incidentally
ploughing up and destroying hedges, ditches, fields, and cultivation generally.
Armies would wallow across the country, leaving nothing behind but dust and
mud.

So our imaginations are led up to the actual hostilities.

Sir Louis was in favor of gas. For punitive expeditions particularly, gas was
to be recommended. And here he startled and disconcerted his hearers by a gleam
of something approaching sentimentality. «It might be possible», he said, «to,
come to some agreement that no gas should be used which caused unnecessary
suffering». But there his heart spoke rather than his head; it should have been
clear to him that if law can so far override warfare as to prohibit any so of
evil device whatever, it can override warfare to the extent of prohibiting it
altogether. And where would Sir Louis Jackson and his audience be then? War is
war; its only law is the law that the maximum destruction of the forces of the
enemy is necessary. To that law in warfare all considerations of humanity and
justice are subordinate.

From gas Sir Louis passed to the air. Here he predicted the most important
advances. . . . We need not trouble ourselves yet with flying destroyers or
flying concrete forts, but in twenty years' time the Air Force Estimates might
be the most important part of our preparations for war». He discussed the
conversion of commercial flying machines to bombing and reconnaissance uses, and
the need for special types of fighting machine in considerable numbers and
always ready. He gave reasons for supposing that the bombers in the next war
would not have the same targets near the front of the armies, and would secure
better results by going further a field and bombing the centers «where stores
are being manufactured and troops trained». As everyone who stayed in London or
the east of England in 1917-18 knows, this means the promiscuous bombing of any
and every center of population. But, of course, the bombing of those 'prentice
days would be child's play to the bombing of the «next war». There would be
countless more aeroplanes, bigger and much nastier bombs. . . .

Sir Louis, proceeding with the sketch, mentioned the «destruction of the
greater part of London» as a possible incident in the coming struggle. And so on
to the culminating moral, that the highest pay, the utmost importance, the
freest expenditure, must be allowed to military gentlemen. «The expense entailed
is in the nature of an absolutely -necessary insurance». With which his
particular audience warmly agreed. And a certain Major-General Stone, a little
forgetful of the source of his phrases,\ [#fn9]_  said he hoped that this lecture «may
be the beginning not of trusting in the League of Nations, but in our own right
hand and our stretched-out arm!»

But we will not go on with the details, of this dream. For indeed no Utopia
was ever so impossible as this forecast of a world in which scarcely anything
but very carefully sandbagged and. camouflaged G.H.Q. would be reasonably safe,
in which countless bombers would bomb the belligerent lands incessantly and
great armies with lines of caterpillar transport roll to and fro, churning the
-fields of the earth into blood-streaked mud. There is not energy enough and no
will whatever left in the world for such things. Generals who cannot foresee
tanks cannot be expected to foresee or understand world bankruptcy; still less
are they likely to understand the limits imposed upon military operations by the
fluctuating temper of the common man. Apparently these military authorities of
the United Service Institution did not even know that warfare aims at the
production of states of mind in the enemy, and is sustained by states of mind.
The chief neglected factor in the calculations of Sir Louis is the fact that no
people whatever will stand such warfare as he contemplates, not even the people
on the winning side. For as northern France, south- eastern Britain, and north
Italy now understand, the victor in the «next war» may be bombed and starved
almost as badly as the loser.

A phase is possible in which a war-tormented population may cease to
discriminate between military gentlemen on this side or that, and may be moved
to destroy them as the common enemies of the race. The Great War of 1914-18 was
the culmination of the military energy of the Western populations, and they
fought and fought well because they believed they were fighting «the war to end
war». They were. German imperialism, with its organized grip upon education and
its close alliance with an aggressive commercialism, was beaten and finished.
The militarism and imperialism of Britain and France and Italy are by comparison
feeble, disorganized, and disorganizing survivals. They are things «left over»
by the Great War. They have no persuasive power. They go on for sheer want of
wits to leave off. No, European Government will ever get the same proportion of
its people into the tanks and into its ammunition-works again as the governments
of 1914 did. Our world is very weak and feeble still. (1920), but its war fever
is over. Its temperature is, if anything, subnormal. It is doubtful if it will
take the fever again for a long time. The alterations in the conditions of
warfare are already much profounder than such authorities as Sir Louis Jackson
suspect.\ [#fn10]_ 

.. [#fn8] Checked by subsequent comparison with the published article in the Jour. of the Roy United Service Institution, vol. lxv, No 457, February,

.. [#fn9] Cp. Psalm cxxxvi.

.. [#fn10] Here is another glimpse of the agreeable dreams that fill the contemporary military mind. It is from Fuller’s recently published Tanks in the Great War. Colonel Fuller does not share that hostility to tanks characteristic of the older type of soldier. In the next war , he tells us; "Fast-moving tanks, equipped with tons of liquid gas . . . will cross the frontier and obliterate every living thing in the fields and farms, the villages, and cities of the enemy’s country. Whilst life is being swept away around the frontier, fleets of aeroplanes will attack the enemy’s great industrial and governing centres. All these attacks will be made at first, not against the enemy’s great army . . . but against the civil population, in order to compel it to accept the will of the attacker.

    For a good, well-balanced account of what modern war really means, see Phillip Gibbs, :t:`Realities of War`.
