
39.5 Russia Still a Grand Monarchy in 1914
========================================================================
While the world to the west of her was changing rapidly, Russia throughout
the nineteenth century changed very slowly indeed. At the end of the nineteenth
century, as at its beginning, she was still a Grand Monarchy of the later
seventeenth- century type standing on a basis of barbarism, she was still at a
stage where court intrigues and imperial favorites could control her
international relations. She had driven a great railway across Siberia to find
the disasters of the Japanese war at the end of it; she was using modern methods
and modern weapons so far as her undeveloped industrialism and her small supply
of sufficiently educated people permitted; such writers as Dostoievski had
devised a sort of mystical imperialism based on the idea of Holy Russia and her
mission, colored by racial illusions and anti-Semitic passion; but, as events
were to show, this had not sunken very deeply into the imagination of the
Russian masses. A vague, very simple Christianity pervaded the illiterate
peasant life, mixed with much superstition. It was like the pre-reformation
peasant life of France or Germany. The Russian moujik was supposed to worship
and revere his Tsar and to love to serve a gentleman; in 1913 reactionary
English writers were still praising his simple and unquestioning loyalty. But,
as in the case of the western European peasant of the days of the peasant
revolts, this reverence for the monarchy was mixed up with the idea that the
monarch and the nobleman had to be good and beneficial, and this simple loyalty
could, under sufficient provocation, be turned into the same pitiless
intolerance of social injustice that burnt the chateaux in the Jacquerie (see
Chapter XXXIV, sec 3) and set up the theocracy in Munster (Chapter XXXIV, sec
3). Once the commons were moved to anger, there were no links of understanding
in a, generally diffused education in Russia to mitigate the fury of the
outbreak. The upper classes were as much beyond the sympathy of the lower as a
different species of animal. These Russian masses were three centuries away from
such nationalist imperialism as Germany displayed.

And in another respect Russia differed from modern Western Europe and
paralleled its mediaeval phase, and that was in the fact that her universities
were the resort of many very poor students quite out of touch and out; of
sympathy with the bureaucratic autocracy. Before 1917 the significance of the
proximity of these two factors of revolution, the fuel of discontent and the
match of free ideas, 'was not recognized in European thought, and few people
realized that in Russia more than in any other country lay the possibilities of
a fundamental revolution.

