
39.6 The United States and the Imperial Idea
========================================================================
When we turn from these European Great Powers, with their inheritance of
foreign offices and national policies, to the United States of America, which
broke away completely from the Great Power System in 1776, we find a most
interesting contrast in the operation of the forces, which produced the
expansive imperialism of Europe. For America as for Europe the mechanical
revolution had brought the world within the range of a few days journey. The
United States, like the Great Powers, had worldwide financial and mercantile
interests; a great industrialism had grown up and was in need of overseas
markets; the same crises of belief that had shaken the moral solidarity of
Europe had occurred in the American world. Her people were as patriotic and
spirited as any. Why then did not the United States develop armaments and an
aggressive policy? Why was not the stars and stripes waving over Mexico, and why
was there not a new Indian system growing up in China under that flag? It was
the American who had opened up Japan. After doing so, be had let that power
Europeanize itself and become formidable without a protest. That alone was
enough to make Machiavelli, the father of modern foreign policy, turn in his
grave. If a Europeanized Great Power had been in the place of the United States,
Great Britain would have had to fortify the Canadian frontier from end to end-it
is now absolutely unarmed-and to maintain a great arsenal in the St. Lawrence.
All the divided states of Central and South America would long since have been
subjugated and placed under the disciplinary control of United States officials
of the «governing class». There would have been a perpetual campaign to
Americanize Australia and New Zealand, and yet another claimant for a share in
tropical Africa.

And by an odd accident America had produced in President Roosevelt (President
1901-1908) a man of an energy as restless as the German Kaiser's, as eager for
large achievements, as florid and eloquent, an adventurous man with a turn for
world politics and an instinct for armaments, the very man, we might imagine, to
have involved his country in the scramble for overseas possession.

There does not appear to be any other explanation of this general restraint
and abstinence on the part of the United States except in their fundamentally
different institutions and traditions. In the first place the United States
Government has no foreign office and no diplomatic corps of the European type,
no body of «experts» to maintain the tradition of an aggressive policy. The
president has great powers, but they are subject to the control of the senate,
which again is responsible to the state legislatures and the people. The foreign
relations of the country are thus under open and public control. Secret treaties
are impossible under such a system, and foreign powers complain of the
difficulty and uncertainty of «understandings» with the United States, a very
excellent state of affairs. The United States is\ [#fn2]_  constitutionally
incapacitated, therefore, from the kind of foreign policy that has kept Europe
for so long constantly on the verge of war.

And, secondly, there has hitherto existed in the States no organization for
and no tradition of what one may call nonassimilable possessions. Where there is
no crown there cannot be crown colonies. In spreading across the American
continent, the United States had developed a quite distinctive method of dealing
with new territories, admirably adapted for unsettled lands, but very
inconvenient if applied too freely to areas already containing an alien
population. This method was based on the idea that there cannot be in the United
States system a permanently subject people. The first stage of the ordinary
process of assimilation had been the creation of a «territory» under the federal
government, having a considerable measure of self-government, sending a delegate
(who could not vote) to congress, and destined, in the natural course of things,
as the country became settled and population increased, to flower at last into
full statehood. This had been the process of development of all the latter
states of the Union; the latest territories to become states being Arizona and
New Mexico in 1910. The frozen wilderness of Alaska, bought from Russia, -
remained politically undeveloped simply because it had an insufficient
population for state organization. As the annexations of Germany and Great
Britain in the Pacific threatened to deprive the United States navy- of coaling
stations in that ocean, a part of the Samoan Islands (1889) and the Sandwich
Islands (Hawaii) were annexed (1898). Here for the first time the United States
had real subject populations to deal with.

But in the absence of any class comparable to the Anglo-Indian officials who
sway British opinion, the American procedure followed the territorial method.
Every effort was made to bring the educational standards of Hawaii up to the
American level, and a domestic legislature on the territorial pattern was
organized so that these dusky islanders seem destined ultimately to obtain full
United States citizenship. (The small Samoan Islands are taken care of by a
United States naval administrator.)

In 1895 occurred a quarrel between the United States and Britain upon the
subject of Venezuela, and the Monroe Doctrine was upheld stoutly by President
Cleveland. Then Mr. Olney made this remarkable declaration: «Today the United
States is practically sovereign on this continent, and its fiat is law upon the
subjects to which it confines its interposition». This, together with the
various Pan-American congresses that have been held, point to a real open
«foreign policy» of alliance and mutual help throughout America. Treaties of
arbitration -hold good over all that continent, and the future seems to point to
a gradual development of interstate organization, a Pax Americana, of the
English-speaking and Spanish-speaking peoples, the former in the role of elder
brother. Here is something we cannot even call an empire, something going far
beyond the great alliance of the British Empire in the open equality of its
constituent parts.

Consistently with this idea of a common American welfare, the United States
in 1898 intervened in the affairs of Cuba, which had been in a state of chronic
insurrection against Spain for many years. A brief war ended in the acquisition
of Cuba, Porto Rico, and the Philippine Islands. Cuba is now an independent
self-governing republic. Porto Rico and the Philippines have, however, a special
sort of government with a popularly elected lower house and an upper body
containing members appointed by the United States senate. It is improbable that
either Porto Rico or the Philippines will become states in the Union. They are
much more likely to become free states in some comprehensive alliance with both
English-speaking and Latin America.

Both Cuba and Porto Rico welcomed the American intervention in their affairs,
but in the Philippine Islands there was a demand for complete and immediate
freedom after the Spanish war, and a considerable resistance to the American
military administration. There it was that the United States came nearest to
imperialism of the Great Power type, and that her record is most questionable.
There was much sympathy with the insurgents in the states. Here is the point of
view of ex-President Roosevelt as he wrote it in his Autobiography (1913):

«As regards the Philippines, my belief was that we should train them for
self-government as rapidly as possible, and then leave them free to decide their
own fate. I did not believe in setting the time-limit within which we would give
them independence, because I did not believe it wise to try to forecast how soon
they would be fit for self-government; and once having made the promise, I would
have felt that it was imperative to keep it. Within a few months of my assuming
office we had stamped out the last armed resistance in the Philippines that was
not of merely sporadic character; and as soon as peace was secured, we turned
our energies to developing the islands in the interests of the natives. We
established schools everywhere; we built roads; we administered an evenhanded
justice; we did everything possible to encourage agriculture and industry; and
in constantly increasing measure we employed natives to do their own governing,
and finally provided a legislative chamber. We are governing, and have been
governing, the islands in the interests of the Filipinos themselves. If after
due time the Filipinos themselves decide that they do not wish to be thus
governed, then I trust that we will leave; but when we do leave, it must be
distinctly understood that we retain no protectorate and above all that we take
part in no joint protectorate-over the islands, and give them no guarantee, of
neutrality or otherwise; that in short, we are absolutely quit of responsibility
for them, of every kind and description».

This is an entirely different outlook from that of a British or French
foreign office or colonial office official. But it is not very widely different
from the spirit that created the Dominions of Canada, South Africa, and
Australia, and brought forward the three Home Rule Bills for Ireland. It is in
the older and more characteristic English tradition from which the Declaration
of Independence derives. It sets aside, without discussion, the detestable idea
of «subject peoples».

Here we will not enter into political complications attendant upon the making
of the Panama Canal, for they introduce no fresh light upon this interesting
question of the American method in world politics. The history of Panama is
American history purely. But manifestly just as the internal political structure
of the Union was a new thing in the world, so, too, were its relations with the
world beyond its borders.

.. [#fn2] "Is" and not "are." Since the Civil War the U. S. A. is one nation. A. C.
