
39.7 The Immediate Causes of the great War
========================================================================
We have been at some pains to examine the state of mind of Europe and of
America in regard to international relations in the years that led up to the
world tragedy of 1914 because, as more and more people are coming to recognize,
that great war or some such war was a necessary consequence of the mentality of
the period. All the things that men and nations do are the outcome of
instinctive motives reacting upon the ideas which tall, and books and newspapers
and schoolmasters and so forth have put into people's heads. Physical
necessities, pestilences, changes of climate, and the like outer things may
deflect and distort the growth of human history, but its living root is
thought.

All human history is fundamentally a history of ideas. Between the man of
today and the CroMagnard the physical and mental differences are very slight;
their essential difference lies in the extent and content of the mental
background, which we have acquired in the five or six hundred generations that
intervene.

We are too close to, the events of the Great War to pretend that this
*Outline* can record the verdict of history thereupon, but we may hazard
the guess that when the passions of the conflict have faded, it will be Germany
that will be most blamed for bringing it about, and she will be blamed not
because she was morally and intellectually very different from her neighbors,
but because she had the common disease of imperialism in its most complete and
energetic form. No self-respecting historian, however superficial and popular
his aims may be, can countenance the legend, produced by the stresses of the
war, that the German is a sort of human being more cruel and abominable than any
other variety of men. All the great states of Europe before 1914 were in a
condition of aggressive nationalism and drifting towards war; the government of
Germany did but lead the general movement. She fell into the pit first, and she
floundered deepest. She became the dreadful example at which all her fellow
sinners could cry out.

For long, Germany and Austria had been plotting an extension of German
influence eastward through Asia Minor to the East. The German idea was
crystallized in the phrase «Berlin to Baghdad». Antagonized to the German dreams
were those of Russia, which was scheming for an extension of the Slav ascendancy
to Constantinople and through Serbia to the Adriatic. These lines of ambition
lay across one another and were mutually incompatible. The feverish state, of
affairs in the Balkans was largely the outcome of the intrigues and propagandas
sustained by the German and Slav schemes. Turkey turned for support to Germany,
Serbia to Russia. Rumania and Italy, both Latin in tradition, both nominally
allies of Germany, pursued remoter and deeper schemes in common. Ferdinand, the
Tsar of Bulgaria, was following still darker ends; and the squalid mysteries of
the Greek court, whose king was the German Kaiser's brother-in-law, are beyond
our present powers of inquiry.

But the tangle did not end with Germany on the one hand and Russia on the
other. The greed of Germany in 1871 had made France her inveterate enemy. The
French people, aware of their inability to recover their lost provinces by their
own strength, had conceived exaggerated ideas of the power and helpfulness of
Russia. The French people had subscribed enormously to Russian loans. France was
the ally of Russia. If the German powers made war upon Russia, France would
certainly attack them.

Now the short eastern French frontier was very strongly defended. There was
little prospect of Germany repeating the successes of 1870-71 against that
barrier. But the Belgian frontier of France was longer and less strongly
defended. An attack in overwhelming force on France through Belgium might repeat
1870 on a larger scale. The French left might be swung back south-eastwardly on
Verdun as a pivot, and crowded back upon its right, as one shuts an open razor.
This scheme the German strategists had worked out with great care and
elaboration. Its execution involved an outrage upon the law of nations because
Prussia had undertaken to guarantee the neutrality of Belgium and had no quarrel
with her, and it involved the risk of bringing in Great Britain (which power was
also pledged to protect Belgium) against Germany. Yet the Germans believed that
their fleet had grown strong enough to make Great Britain hesitate to interfere,
and with a view to possibilities they had constructed a great system of
strategic railways to the Belgian frontier, and made every preparation for the
execution of this scheme. So they might hope to strike down France at one blow,
and deal at their leisure with Russia.

In 1914 all things seemed moving together in favor of the two Central Powers.
Russia, it is true, had been recovering since 1906, but only very slowly; France
was distracted by financial scandals. The astounding murder of M. Calmette, the
editor of the Figaro, by the wife of M. Caillaux, the minister of finance,
brought these to a climax in March; Britain, all Germany was assured, was on the
verge of a civil war in Ireland. Repeated efforts were made both by foreign and
English, people to get some definite statement of what Britain would do if
Germany and Austria assailed France and Russia; but the British Foreign
Secretary maintained a front of heavy ambiguity up to the very day of the
British entry into the war. As a consequence, there was a feeling on the
continent that Britain would either not fight or delay fighting, and this may
have encouraged Germany to go on threatening France. Events were precipitated on
June 28th by the assassination of the Archduke Francis Ferdinand, the heir to
the Austrian Empire, when on a state visit to Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia.
Here was a timely excuse to set the armies marching. «It is now, or never», said
the German Emperor. Serbia was accused of instigating the murderers, and
notwithstanding the fact that Austrian commissioners reported that there was no
evidence to implicate the Serbian government, the Austro-Hungarian government
contrived to press this grievance towards war. On, July 23rd Austria discharged
an ultimatum at Serbia, and, in spite, of a practical submission on the part of
Serbia, and of the efforts of Sir Edward Grey, the British Foreign Secretary, to
call a conference of the powers, declared war against Serbia on July 28th.

Russia mobilized her army on July 30th, and on August 1st Germany declared
war upon her. German troops crossed into French territory next day, and,
simultaneously with the delivery of an ultimatum to the unfortunate Belgians,
the big flanking movement through Luxembourg and Belgium began. Westward rode
the scouts and advance guards. Westward rushed a multitude of automobiles packed
with soldiers. Enormous columns of gray-clad infantry followed; round-eyed, fair
young Germans they were for the most, part-law-abiding, educated youngsters who
had never yet seen a shot fired in anger. «This was war», they were told. They
had to be bold and ruthless. Some of them did their best to carry out these
militarist instructions at the expense of the ill-fated Belgians.

A disproportionate fuss has been made over the detailed atrocities in
Belgium, disproportionate, that is, in relation to the fundamental atrocity of
August 1914, which was the invasion of Belgium. Given that, the casual shootings
and lootings, the wanton destruction of property, the plundering of inns and of
food and drink shops by hungry and weary men, and the consequent rapes and
incendiarism follow naturally enough. Only very simple people believe that an
army in the field can maintain as high a level of honesty, decency, and justice
as a settled community at home. And the tradition of the Thirty Years' War still
influenced the Prussian army. It has been customary in the countries allied
against Germany to treat all this vileness and bloodshed of the Belgian months
as though nothing of the sort had ever happened before, and as if it were, due
to some distinctively evil strain in the German character. They were nicknamed
«Huns». But nothing could be less like the systematic destructions of these
nomads (who once proposed to exterminate the entire Chinese population in order
to restore China to pasture) than the German crimes in Belgium. Much of that
crime was the drunken brutality of men who for the first time in their lives
were free to use lethal weapons, much of it was the hysterical violence of men
shocked at their own proceedings and in deadly fear of the revenge of the people
whose country they had outraged, and much of it was done under duress because of
the theory that men should be terrible in warfare and that populations are best
subdued by fear. The German common people were bundled from an orderly obedience
into this war in such a manner that atrocities were bound to ensue. They
certainly did horrible and disgusting things but any people who had been worked
up for war and led into war as the Germans were would have behaved in a similar
manner.

On the night of August 2nd, while most of Europe, still under the tranquil
inertias of half a century of peace, still in the habitual enjoyment of such a
widely diffused plenty and cheapness and freedom as no man living will ever see
again, was thinking about its summer holidays, the little Belgian village of
Vise' was ablaze, and stupefied rustics were being led out and shot because it
was alleged someone had fired on the invaders.

The officers who ordered these acts, the men who obeyed, must surely have
felt scared at the strangeness of the things they did. Most of them had never
yet seen a violent death. And they had set light not to a village, but a world.
It was the beginning of the end of an age of comfort, confidence, and gentle and
seemly behavior in Europe.

So soon as it was clear that Belgium was to be invaded, Great Britain ceased
to hesitate, and (at eleven at night on August 4th) declared war upon Germany.
The following day a German mine- laying vessel was caught off the Thames mouth
by the cruiser *Amphion* and sunk,-the first time that the British and
Germans had ever met in conflict under their own national flags upon land or
water. . . .

All Europe still remembers the strange atmosphere of those eventful sunny
August days, the end of the Armed Peace. For nearly half a century the Western
world had been tranquil and had seemed safe, Only a few middle-aged and ageing
people in France had had any practical experience of warfare. The newspapers
spoke of a world catastrophe, but that conveyed very little meaning to those for
whom the world had always seemed secure, who were indeed almost incapable of
thinking of it as otherwise than secure. In Britain particularly for some weeks
the peacetime routine continued in a slightly dazed fashion. It was like a man
still walking about the world unaware that he has contracted a fatal disease,
which will alter every routine and habit in his life. People went on with their
summer holidays; shops reassured their customers with the announcement «business
as usual». There was much talk and excitement when the newspapers came, but it
was the talk and excitement of spectators who have no vivid sense of
participation in the catastrophe that was presently to involve them all.

