11.1 Primitive Philosophy
================================================================

Before we go on to tell how 6,000 or 7,000 years ago men began to gather into
the first towns and to develop something more than the loose-knit tribes that
had hitherto been their highest political association, something must be said
about the things that were going on inside these brains of which we have
traced the growth and development through a period of 500,000 years from the
ape-man stage.

What was man thinking about himself and about the world in those remote days?

At first he thought very little about anything but immediate things. At first
he was busy thinking such things as: "Here is a bear; what shall I do?" Or
"There is a squirrel; how can I get it?" Until language had developed to some
extent there could have been little thinking beyond the range of actual
experience, for language is the instrument of thought as bookkeeping is the
instrument of business. It records and fixes and enables thought to get on to
more and more complex ideas. It is the hand of the mind to hold and keep.
Primordial man, before he could talk, probably saw very vividly, mimicked
very cleverly, gestured, laughed, danced, and lived, without much speculation
about whence he came or why he lived. He feared the dark, no doubt, and
thunderstorms and big animals and queer things and whatever he dreamt about,
and no doubt he did things to propitiate what he feared or to change his luck
and please the imaginary powers in rock and beast and river. He made no clear
distinction between animate and inanimate things; if a stick hurt him, he
kicked it; if the river foamed and flooded, he thought it was hostile. His
thought was probably very much at the level of a bright little contemporary
boy of four or five. He had the same subtle unreasonableness of transition
and the same limitations. But since he had little or no speech he would do
little to pass on the fancies that came to him, and develop any tradition or
concerted acts about them.

The drawings even of Late Paleolithic man do not suggest that he paid any
attention to sun or moon or stars or trees. He was preoccupied only with
animals and men. Probably he took day and night, sun and stars, trees and
mountains, as being in the nature of things — as a child takes its meal times
and its nursery staircase for granted. So far as we can judge, he drew no
fantasies, no ghosts or anything of that sort. The Reindeer men's drawings
are fearless familiar things, with no hint about them of any religious or
occult feelings. There is scarcely anything that we can suppose to be a
religious or mystical symbol at all in his productions. No doubt he had a
certain amount of what is called *fetishism* in his life; he did things we
should now think unreasonable to produce desired ends, for that is all
fetishism amounts to; it is only incorrect science based on guess-work or
false analogy, and entirely different in its nature from religion. No doubt
he was excited by his dreams, and his dreams mixed up at times in his mind
with his waking impressions and puzzled him. Since he buried his dead, and
since even the later Neanderthal men seem to have buried their dead, and
apparently with food and weapons, it has been argued that he had a belief in
a future life. But it is just as reasonable to suppose that early men buried
their dead with food and weapons because they doubted if they were dead,
which is not the same thing as believing them to have immortal spirits, and
that their belief in their continuing vitality was reinforced by dreams of
the departed. They may have ascribed a sort of were-wolf existence to the
dead, and wished to propitiate them. The Reindeer man, we feel, was too
intelligent and too like ourselves not to have had some speech, but quite
probably it was not very serviceable for anything beyond direct statement or
matter-of-fact narrative. He lived in a larger community than the
Neanderthaler, but how large we do not know. Except when game is swarming,
hunting communities must not keep together in large bodies or they will
starve. The Indians who depend upon the caribou in Labrador must be living
under circumstances rather like those of the Reindeer men. They scatter in
small family groups, as the caribou scatter in search of food; but when the
deer collect for the seasonal migration, the Indians also collect. That is
the time for trade and feasts and marriages. The simplest American Indian is
10,000 years more sophisticated than the Reindeer man, but probably that sort
of gathering and dispersal was also the way of Reindeer men. At Solutre in
France there are traces of a great camping and feasting place. There was no
doubt an exchange of news there, but one may doubt if there was anything like
an exchange of ideas. One sees no scope in such a life for theology or
philosophy or superstition or speculation. Fears, yes; but unsystematic
fears; fancies and freaks of the imagination, but personal and transitory
freaks and fancies.

Perhaps there was a certain power of suggestion in these encounters. A fear
really felt needs few words for its transmission; a value set upon something
may be very simply conveyed.

In these questions of primitive thought and religion, we must remember that
the lowly and savage peoples of today probably throw very little light on the
mental state of men before the days of fully developed language. Primordial
man could have had little or no tradition before the development of speech.
All savage and primitive peoples of today, on the contrary, are soaked in
tradition — the tradition of thousands of generations. They may have weapons
like their remote ancestors and methods like them, but what were slight and
shallow impressions on the minds of their predecessors are now deep and
intricate grooves worn throughout the intervening centuries generation by
generation.

