11.3 Fear and Hope in Religion
================================================================

Another idea probably arose early out of the mysterious visitation of
infectious diseases, and that was the idea of uncleanness and of being
accurst. From that, too, there may have come an idea of avoiding particular
places and persons, and persons in particular phases of health. Here was the
root of another set of tabus. Then man, from the very dawn of his mental
life, may have had a feeling of the sinister about places and things. Animals
who dread traps have that feeling. A tiger will abandon its usual jungle
route at the sight of a few threads of cotton.\ [#fn1]_ Like most young animals,
young human beings are easily made fearful of this or that by their nurses
and seniors. Here is another set of ideas, ideas of repulsion and avoidance,
that sprang up almost inevitably in men.

As soon as speech began to develop, it must have got to work upon such
fundamental feelings and begun to systematize them, and keep them in mind. By
talking together men would reinforce each other's fears and establish a
common tradition of tabus of things forbidden and of things unclean. With the
idea of uncleanness would come ideas of cleansing and of removing a curse.
The cleansing would be conducted through the advice and with the aid of wise
old men or wise old women, and in such cleansing would lie the germ of the
earliest priestcraft and witchcraft.

Speech from the first would be a powerful supplement to the merely imitative
education and to the education of cuffs and blows conducted by a speechless
parent. Mothers would tell their young and scold their young. As speech
developed, men would find they had experiences and persuasions that gave them
or seemed to give them power. They would make secrets of these things. There
is a double streak in the human mind, a streak cunning secretiveness and a
streak, perhaps of later origin, that makes us all anxious to tell and
astonish and impress each other. Many people make secrets in order to have
secrets to tell. These secrets of early men they would convey to younger,
more impressionable people, more or less honestly and impressively in some
process of initiation. Moreover, the pedagogic spirit overflows in the human
mind; most people like ?telling other people not to?. Extensive arbitrary
prohibitions for the boys, for the girls, for the women, also probably came
very early into human history.

Then the idea of the sinister has for its correlative the idea of the
propitious, and from that to the idea of making things propitious by
ceremonies is an easy step.

.. [#fn1] Glasfurd's :t:`Rifle and Romance in the Indian Jungle`, 1915.

