11.4 Stars and Seasons
================================================================

Out of such ideas and a jumble of kindred ones grew the first quasi-religious
elements in human life. With every development of speech it became possible
to intensify and develop the tradition of tabus and restraints and
ceremonies. There is not a savage or barbaric race today that is not held in
a net of such tradition. And with the coming of the primitive herdsman there
would be a considerable broadening out of all this sort of practice. Things
hitherto unheeded would be found of importance in human affairs. Neolithic
man was nomadic in a different spirit from the mere daylight drift after food
of the primordial hunter. He was a herdsman upon whose mind a sense of
direction and the lie of the land had been forced. He watched his flock by
night as well as by day. The sun by day and presently the stars by night
helped to guide his migrations; he began to find after many ages that the
stars are steadier guides than the sun. He would begin to note particular
stars and star groups, and to distinguish any individual thing was, for
primitive man, to believe it individualized and personal. He would begin to
think of the chief stars as persons, very shining and dignified and
trustworthy persons looking at him like bright eyes in the night. His
primitive tillage strengthened his sense of the seasons. Particular stars
ruled his heavens when seedtime was due. Up to a certain point, a mountain
peak or what not, a bright star moved, night after night. It stopped there,
and then night after night receded. Surely this was a sign, a silent,
marvellous warning to the wise. The beginnings of agriculture, we must
remember, were in the sub-tropical zone, or even nearer the equator, where
stars of the first magnitude shine with a splendour unknown in more temperate
latitudes.


.. _Figure 98:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0098.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0098.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 98

    Figure 98: A Menhir of the Neolithic Period

    A carved statue ("menhir") of the Neolithic period â€” a contrast to the freedom and vigour of Paleolithic art.

And Neolithic man was counting, and falling under the spell of numbers. There
are savage languages that have no word for any number above five. Some
peoples cannot go above two. But Neolithic man in the lands of his origin in
Asia, and Africa even more than in Europe was already counting his
accumulating possessions. He was beginning to use tallies, and wondering at
the triangularity of three and the squareness of four, and why some
quantities like twelve were easy to divide in all sorts of ways, and others,
like thirteen, impossible. Twelve became a noble, generous, and familiar
number to him, and thirteen rather an outcast and disreputable one.

Probably man began reckoning time by the clock of the full and new moons.
Moonlight is an important thing to herdsmen who no longer merely hunt their
herds, but watch and guard them. Moonlight, too, was, perhaps, his time for
love-making, as indeed it may have been for primordial man and the ground ape
ancestor before him. But from the phases man's attitude would go on to the
greater cycle of the seasons.

Primordial man probably only drifted before the winter as the days grew cold.
Neolithic man knew surely that the winter would come, and stored his fodder
and presently his grain. He had to fix a seedtime, a propitious seedtime, or
his sowing was a failure. The earliest recorded reckoning is by moons and by
generations of men. The former seems to be the case in the Book of Genesis,
where, if one reads the great ages of the patriarchs who lived before the
flood as lunar months instead of years, Methuselah and the others are reduced
to a credible length of life. But with agriculture began the difficult task
of squaring the lunar month with the solar year; a task which has left its
scars on our calendar today. Easter shifts uneasily from year to year, to the
great discomfort of holiday-makers; it is now inconveniently early and now
late in the season because of this ancient reference of time to the moon.

And when men began to move with set intention from place to place with their
animal and other possessions, then they would begin to develop the idea of
other places in which they were not, and to think of what might be in those
other places. And in any valley where they lingered for a time, they would,
remembering how they got there, ask, "How did this or that other thing get
here?" They would begin to wonder what was beyond the mountains, and where
the sun went when it set, and what was above the clouds.

