11.6 Complex Origins of Religion
================================================================

With the beginnings of agriculture a fresh set of ideas arose in men's minds.
We have already indicated how easily and naturally men may have come to
associate the idea of sowing with a burial. Sir J. G. Frazer has pursued the
development of this association in the human mind, linking up with it the
conception of special sacrificial persons who are killed at seedtime, the
conception of a specially purified class of people to kill these sacrifices,
the first priests, and the conception of a *sacrament,* a ceremonial feast in
which the tribe eats portions of the body of the victim in order to share in
the sacrificial benefits.


.. _Figure 101:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0101.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0101.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 101

    Figure 101: Bronze Age Implements

Out of all these factors, out of the Old Man tradition, out of the emotions
that surround Women for men and Men for women, out of the desire to escape
infection and uncleanness, out of the desire for power and success through
magic, out of the sacrificial tradition of seedtime, and out of a number of
like beliefs and mental experiments and misconceptions, a complex something
was growing up in the lives of men which was beginning to bind them together
mentally and emotionally in a common life and action.

This something we may call religion (Lat. *religare*, to bind\ [#fn3]_). It was
not a simple, or logical some thing, it was as a tangle of ideas about
commanding beings and spirits, about gods, about all sorts of ?musts? and
"must-nots". Like all other human matters, religion has grown. It must be
clear from what has gone before that primitive man — much less his ancestral
apes and his ancestral Mesozoic mammals — could have had no idea of God or
Religion; only very slowly did his brain and his powers of comprehension
become capable of such general conceptions. Religion is something that has
grown up with and through human association, and God has been and is still
being discovered by man.

This book is not a theological book, and it is not for us to embark upon
theological discussion; but it is a part, a necessary and central part, of
the history of man to describe the dawn and development of his religious
ideas and their influence upon his activities. All these factors we have
noted must have contributed to this development, and various writers have
laid most stress upon one or other of them. Sir J. G. Frazer has been the
leading student of the derivation of sacraments from magic sacrifices. Grant
Allen, following Herbert Spencer, in his Evolution of the Idea of God, laid
stress chiefly on the posthumous worship of the "Old Man". Sir E. B. Tutor
(Primitive Culture) gave his attention mainly to the disposition of primitive
man to ascribe a soul to every object animate and inanimate. Mr. A. E.
Crawley, in The Tree of Life, has called attention to other centres of
impulse and emotion, and particularly to sex as a source of deep excitement.
The thing we have to bear in mind is that Neolithic man was still mentally
undeveloped, he could be confused and illogical to a degree quite impossible
to an educated modern person. Conflicting and contradictory ideas could lie
in his mind without challenging one another; now one thing ruled his thoughts
intensely and vividly and now another; his fears, his acts, were still
disconnected as children's are.

.. _Figure 103:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0103.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0103.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 103

    Figure 103: Diagram showing the Duration of the Neolithic Period

    Time diagram showing the general duration of the neolithic period in which
    early thought developed. By this scale, the diagram in :ref:`Figure 47`, of the
    period since the earliest subhuman traces, would be 12 feet long, and the
    diagram of geological time (:ref:`Figure 11`) somewhere between 1,500 feet and
    three miles.

Confusedly under the stimulus of the need and possibility of co-operation and
a combined life, Neolithic mankind was feeling out for guidance and
knowledge. Men were becoming aware that personally they needed protection and
direction, cleansing from impurity, power beyond their own strength.

Confusedly in response to that demand, bold men, wise men, shrewd and cunning
men were arising to become magicians, priests, chiefs, and Kings.

They are not to be thought of as cheats or usurpers of power, nor the rest of
mankind as their dupes. All men seek ascendancy over other men, but not all
such motives are base or bad. The magicians usually believed more or less in
their own magic, the priests in their ceremonies, the chiefs in their right.
The history of mankind henceforth is a history of more or less blind
endeavours to conceive a common purpose in relation to which all men may live
happily, and to create and develop a common consciousness and a common stock
of knowledge which may serve and illuminate that purpose. In a vast variety
of forms this is appearance of kings and priests and magic men was happening
all over the world under Neolithic conditions. Everywhere mankind was seeking
where knowledge and mastery and magic power might reside; everywhere
individual men were willing, honestly or dishonestly, to rule, to direct, or
to be the magic beings who would reconcile the confusions of the community.
Another queer development of the later Paleolithic and Neolithic ages was the
development of self-mutilation. Men began to cut themselves about, to excise
noses, ears, fingers, teeth and the like, and to attach all sorts of
superstitious ideas to these acts. Many children today pass through a similar
phase in their mental development. There is a phase in the life of most
little girls when they are not to be left alone with a pair of scissors for
fear that they will cut off their hair. No animal does anything of this sort.

In many ways the simplicity, directness, and, detachment of a later
Paleolithic rock-painter appeal more to modern sympathies than does the state
of mind of these Neolithic men, full of the fear of some ancient Old Man who
had developed into a tribal God obsessed by ideas of sacrificial
propitiations, mutilations, and magic murder. No doubt the reindeer hunter
was a ruthless hunter and a combative and passionate creature, but he killed
for reasons we can still understand; Neolithic man, under the sway of talk
and a confused thought process, killed on theory, he killed for monstrous and
now incredible ideas, he killed those he loved through fear and under
direction. Those Neolithic men not only made human sacrifices at seedtime
there is every reason to suppose they sacrificed wives and slaves at the
burial of their chieftains; they killed men, women, and children whenever
they were under adversity and thought the gods were athirst. They practised
infanticide. All these things passed on into the Bronze Age.

Hitherto a social consciousness had been asleep and not even dreaming in
human history. Before it awakened it produced nightmares.

Away beyond the dawn of history, 3,000 or 4,000 years ago, one thinks of the
Wiltshire uplands in the twilight of a midsummer day's morning. The torches
pale in the growing light. One has a dim apprehension of a procession through
the avenue of stone, of priests, perhaps fantastically dressed with skins and
horns and horrible painted masks — not the robed and bearded dignitaries our
artists represent the Druids to have been — of chiefs in skins adorned with
necklaces of teeth and bearing spears and axes, their great heads of hair
held up with pins of bone, of women in skins or flaxen robes, of a great
peering crowd of shock-headed men and naked children. They have assembled
from many distant places; the ground between the avenues and Silbury Hill is
dotted with their encampments. A certain festive cheerfulness prevails. And
amidst the throng march the appointed human victims, submissive, helpless,
staring towards the distant smoking altar at which they are to die that the
harvests may be good and the tribe increase.... To that had life progressed
3,000 or 4,000 years ago from its starting-place in the slime of the tidal
beaches.

.. [#fn3] But Cicero says *relegere*, "to read over," and the binding of those who accept *religare* is often written of as being merely the binding of a vow.

