40.1 The Possible Unification of Men's Wills in Political Matters
========================================================================
We have brought this *Outline of History* up to the threshold of our own
times, but we have brought it to no conclusion. It breaks off at a dramatic
phase of expectation. Nobody believes that the system of settlements grouped
about the Treaty of Versailles is a permanent arrangement of the world's
affairs. These Treaties were the end of the war and not the establishment of a
new order in the world. That new order has now to be established. In social and
economic as in international affairs we are in the dawn of a great constructive
effort. The story of life, which began inestimable millions of years ago, the
adventure of mankind, which was already afoot half a million years ago, rises to
a crisis in the immense interrogation of to-day. The drama becomes ourselves. It
is you, it is I, and it is all that is happening to us and all that we are doing
which will supply the next chapter of this continually expanding adventure of
mankind.

Our history has traced a steady growth of the social and political units into
which men have combined. In the brief period of ten thousand years these units
have grown from the small family tribe of the early Neolithic culture to the
vast united realms—vast yet still too small and partial—of the present time. And
this change in size of the state—a change manifestly incomplete—has been
accompanied by profound changes in its nature. Compulsion and servitude have
given way to ideas of associated freedom, and the sovereignty that was once
concentrated in an autocratic king and god, has been widely diffused throughout
the community. Until the Roman republic extended itself to all Italy, there had
been no free community larger than a city state; all great communities were
communities of obedience under a monarch. The great united republic of the
United States would have been: impossible before, the printing press and the
railway. The telegraph and telephone, the aeroplane, the continual progress of
land and sea transit, are now insisting upon a still larger political
organization.

If our *Outline,* has been faithfully drawn, and if these brief
conclusions are sound, it follows that we are engaged upon an immense task of
adjustment to these great lines upon which our affairs are moving. Our wars, our
social conflict, our enormous economic stresses, are all aspects of that
adjustment. The loyalties and allegiances today are at best provisional
loyalties and allegiances. Our true State, this state that is already beginning,
this state to which every man owes his utmost political effort, must be now,
this nascent Federal World State to which, human necessities point. Our true God
now is the God of all men. Nationalism as a God must follow the tribal gods to
limbo. Our true nationality is mankind.

How far will modern men lay hold upon and identify themselves with this
necessity and set themselves to revise their ideas, remake their institutions,
and educate the coming generations to this final extension of citizenship? How
far will they remain dark, obdurate, habitual and traditional, resisting the
convergent forces that offer them either unity or misery? Sooner or later that
unity must come or else plainly men must perish by their own inventions. We,
because we believe in the power of reason and in the increasing good will in
men, find ourselves compelled to reject the latter possibility. But the way to
the former may be very long and tedious, very tragic and wearisome a martyrdom
of many generations, or it, may be travelled over almost swiftly in the course
of a generation or so. That depends upon, forces whose nature we understand to,
some extent now, but not their power. There has to be a great process of
education, by precept and by information and by experience but there are as yet
no quantitative measures of education to tell us *how much* has to be
learnt or *how soon* that learning can be done. Our estimates vary with our
moods; the time may be much longer than our hopes and much shorter than our
fears.

The terrible experiences of the Great War have made very many men who once
took political things lightly take them now very gravely. To a certain small
number of men and women the attainment of a world peace has become the supreme
work in life, has become a religious self-devotion. To a much greater number it
has become at least a ruling motive. Many such people now are seeking ways of
working for this great end, or they are already working for this great end, by
pen and persuasion, in schools and colleges and books, and in the highways and
byways of public life. Perhaps now most human beings in the world are
well-disposed towards such efforts, but rather confusedly disposed; they are
without any clear sense of what must be done and what ought to be prevented,
that human solidarity may be advanced. The worldwide outbreak of faith and hope
in President Wilson, before he began to wilt and fail us, was a very significant
thing indeed for the future of mankind. Set against these motives of unity
indeed are other motives entirely antagonistic, the fear and hatred of strange
things and peoples, love of and trust in the old traditional thing, patriotisms,
race prejudices, suspicions, distrusts—and the elements of spite, scoundrelism,
and utter selfishness that are so strong still in every human soul.

The overriding powers that hitherto in the individual soul and in the
community have struggled and prevailed against the ferocious, base, and
individual impulses that divide us from one another, have been the powers of
religion and education. Religion and education, those closely interwoven
influences, have made possible the greater human societies whose growth we have
traced in this *Outline,* they have been the chief synthetic forces
throughout this great story of enlarging human co-operations that we have traced
from its beginnings. We have found in the intellectual and theological conflicts
of the nineteenth century the explanation of that curious exceptional
disentanglement of religious teaching from formal education which is a
distinctive feature of our age, and we have traced the consequences of this
phase of religious disputation and confusion in the reversion of international
politics towards a brutal nationalism and in the backward drift of industrial
and business life towards harsh, selfish, and uncreative profit-seeking. There
has been a slipping off of ancient restraints; a real *decivilization* of
men's minds. We would lay stress here on the suggestion that this divorce of
religious teaching from organized education is necessarily a temporary one, a
transitory dislocation, and that presently education must become again in
intention and spirit religious, and that the impulse to devotion, to universal
service and to a complete escape from self, which has been the common underlying
force in all the great religions of the last five and twenty centuries, an
impulse which ebbed so perceptibly during the prosperity, laxity,
disillusionment, and scepticism of the past seventy or eighty years, will
reappear again, stripped and plain, as the recognized fundamental structural
impulse in human society.

Education is the preparation of the individual for the community, and his
religious training is the core of that preparation. With the great intellectual
restatements and expansions of the nineteenth century, an educational break-up,
a confusion and loss of aim in education, was inevitable. We can no longer
prepare the individual for a community when our ideas of a community are
shattered and undergoing reconstruction. The old loyalties, the old too limited
and narrow political and social assumptions, the old too elaborate religious
formulae, have lost their power of conviction, and the greater ideas of a world
state and of an economic commonweal have been winning their way only very slowly
to recognition. So far they have swayed only a minority of exceptional people.
But out of the trouble and tragedy of this present time there may emerge a moral
and intellectual revival, a religious revival, of a simplicity and scope to draw
together men of alien races and now discrete traditions into one common and
sustained way of living for the world's service. We cannot foretell the scope
and power of such a revival; we cannot even produce evidence of its onset. The
beginnings of such things are never conspicuous. Great movements of the racial
soul come at first «like a thief in the night», and then suddenly are discovered
to be powerful and world-wide. Religious emotion—stripped of corruptions and
freed from its last priestly entanglements—may presently blow, through life
again like a great wind, bursting the doors and flinging open the shutters of
the individual life, and making many things possible and easy that in these
present days of exhaustion seem almost too difficult to desire.

