
40.4 What this World Might be were it under One Law and Justice
========================================================================
There can be little question that the attainment of a federation of all
humanity, together with a sufficient measure of social justice, to ensure
health, education, and a rough equality of opportunity to most of the children
born into the world, would mean such a release and increase of human energy as
to open a new phase in human history. The enormous waste caused by military
preparation and the mutual annoyance of competing great powers, and the still
more enormous waste due to the under-productiveness of great masses of people,
either because they are too wealthy for stimulus or too poor for efficiency,
would cease. There would be a vast increase in the supply of human necessities,
a rise in the standard of life and in what is considered a necessity, a
development of transport and every kind of convenience and a multitude of people
would be transferred from low-grade production to such higher work as art of all
kinds, teaching; scientific research, and the like. All over the world there
would be a setting free of human capacity, such as has occurred hitherto only in
small, places and through precious limited phases of prosperity and security.
Unless we are to suppose that spontaneous outbreaks of supermen have occurred in
the past, it is reasonable to conclude that the Athens of Pericles, the Florence
of the Medici, Elizabethan England, the great deeds of Asoka, the Tang and Ming
periods in art, are but samples of what a whole world of sustained security
would yield continuously and cumulatively. Without supposing any change in human
quality, but merely its release from the present system of inordinate waste,
history justifies this expectation.

We have seen how, since the liberation of human thought in the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries, a comparatively few curious and intelligent men, chiefly in
western Europe, have produced a vision of the world and a body of science that
is now, on the material side, revolutionizing life. Mostly these men have worked
against great discouragement, with insufficient funds and small help or support
from the mass of mankind. It is impossible to believe that these men were the
maximum intellectual harvest of their generation. England alone in the last
three centuries must have produced scores of Newtons who never learnt to read,
hundreds of Daltons, Darwins, Bacons, and Huxleys who died stunted in hovels, or
never got a chance of proving their quality. All the world over, there must have
been myriads, of potential first-class investigators, splendid artists, creative
minds, who never caught a gleam of inspiration or opportunity, for every one of
that kind who has left his mark upon the world. In the trenches of the Western
front alone during the late war thousands of potential great men died
unfulfilled. But a world with something like a secure international peace and
something like social justice, will fish for capacity with the fine net of
universal education, and may expect a yield beyond comparison greater than any
yield of able and brilliant men that the world has known hitherto.

It is such considerations as this indeed which justify the concentration of
effort in the near future upon the making of a new world state of righteousness
out of our present confusions. War is a horrible thing, and constantly more
horrible and dreadful, so that unless it is ended it will certainly end human
society; social injustice, and the sight of the limited and cramped human beings
it produces, torment the soul; but the strongest incentive to constructive
political and social work for an imaginative spirit lies not so much in the mere
hope of escaping evils as in the opportunity for great adventures that their
suppression will open to our race. We want to get rid of the militarist not
simply because he hurts and kills, but because he is an intolerable thick-voiced
blockhead who stands hectoring and blustering in our way to achievement. We want
to abolish many extravagances of private ownership just as we should want to
abolish some idiot guardian who refused us admission to a studio in which there
were fine things to do.

There are people who seem to imagine that a world order and one universal law
of justice would end human adventure. It would but begin it. But instead of the
adventure of the past, the «romance» of the cinematograph world, the perpetual
reiterated harping upon the trite reactions of sex and combat find the hunt for
gold, it would be an unending exploration upon the edge of experience. Hitherto
man has been living in a. slum, amidst quarrels, revenges, vanities, shames and
taints, hot desires and urgent appetites. He has scarcely tasted sweet air yet
and the great freedoms of the world that science has enlarged for him.

To picture to ourselves something of the wider life that world unity would
open to men is a very attractive speculation. Life will certainly go with a
stronger pulse, it will breathe a deeper breath, because it will have dispelled
and conquered a hundred infections of body and mind that now reduce it to
invalidism and squalor. We have already laid stress on the vast elimination of
drudgery from human life through the creation of a new race of slaves, the
machines. This and the disappearance of war and the smoothing out of endless
restraints and contentions by juster social and economic arrangements will lift
the burthen of toilsome work and routine work that has been the price of human
security since the dawn of the first civilizations, from the shoulders of our
children. Which does not mean that they will cease to work, but that they will
cease to do irksome work under pressure, and will work freely, planning, making,
creating, according to their gifts and instincts. They will fight nature no
longer as dull conscripts of the pick and plough, but for a splendid conquest.
Only the spiritlessness of our, present depression blinds us to the clear
intimations of our reason that in the course of a few generations every little
country town could become an Athens, every human being could be gentle in
breeding and healthy in body and mind, the whole solid earth man's mine and its
uttermost regions his playground.

In this *Outline* we have sought to show two great systems of
development interacting in the story of human society. We have seen, growing out
of that later special neolithic culture, the heliolithic, culture in the warmer
alluvial parts of the world, the great primordial civilizations, fecund systems
of subjugation and obedience, vast multiplications of industrious and
subservient men. We have shown the necessary relationship of these early
civilizations to the early temples and to king-gods, and god-kings. At the same
time we have traced the development from a simpler neolithic level of the
wanderer peoples, who became the nomadic peoples, in those great groups the
Aryans and the Hun-Mongol peoples of the north-west and the north-east and (from
a heliolithic phase) the Semites of the Arabian deserts. Our history has told of
a repeated overrunning and refreshment of the originally brunet civilizations by
these hardier, bolder, free-spirited peoples of the steppes and desert. We have
pointed out how these constantly recurring nomadic, injections have steadily
altered the primordial civilizations both in blood and in spirit; and how the
world religions of to-day, and what we now call democracy, the boldness of
modern scientific inquiry and a universal restlessness, are due to this
«nomadization» of civilization. The old civilizations created tradition and
lived by tradition. To-day the power of tradition is destroyed. The body of our
state is civilization still, but its spirit is the spirit of the nomadic world.
It is the spirit of the great plains and the high seas.

So that it is difficult to resist the persuasion that so soon as one law,
runs in the earth and the fierceness of frontiers ceases to distress us, that
urgency in our nature that stirs us in spring and autumn to be up and
travelling, will have its way with us. We shall obey the call of the summer
pastures and the winter pastures in our blood, the call of the mountains, the
desert, and the sea. For some of us also, who may be of a different lineage,
there is the call of the forest, and there are those who would hunt in the
summer and return to the fields for the harvest and the plough. But this does
not mean that men will have become homeless and all adrift. The normal nomadic
life is not a homeless one, but a movement between homes. The Kalmucks to-day,
like the swallows, go yearly a thousand miles from one home to another. The
beautiful and convenient cities of the coming age, we conclude, will have their
seasons when they will be full of life, and seasons when they will seem asleep.
Life will ebb and flow to and from every region seasonally as the interest of
that region rises or declines.

There will be little drudgery in this better-ordered world. Natural power
harnessed in machines will be the general drudge. What drudgery is inevitable
will be done as a service and duty for a few years or months out of each life;
it will not consume nor degrade the whole life of anyone. And not only drudges,
but many other sorts of men and ways of living which loom large in the current
social scheme will necessarily have dwindled in importance or passed away
altogether. There will be few professional fighting men or none at all, no
customhouse officers; the increased multitude of teachers will have abolished
large police forces and large jail staffs, mad-houses will be rare or
non-existent; a world-wide sanitation will have diminished the proportion of
hospitals, nurses, sick-room attendants, and the like; a world-wide economic
justice, the floating population of cheats, sharpers, gamblers, forestallers,
parasites, and speculators generally. But there will be no diminution of
adventure or romance in this world of the days to come. Sea fisheries and the
incessant insurrection of the sea, for example, will call for their own Stalwart
types of men; the high air will clamour for manhood, the deep and dangerous
secret places of nature. Men will turn again with renewed interest to the animal
world. In these disordered days a stupid, uncontrollable massacre of animal
species goes on-from certain angles of vision, it is a thing almost more tragic
than human miseries; in the nineteenth century dozens of animal species, and
some of them very interesting species, were exterminated; but one of the first
fruits of an effective world state would be the better protection of what are
now wild beasts. It is a strange thing in human history to note how little has
been done since the Bronze Age in taming, using, befriending, and appreciating
the animal life about us. But that mere witless killing, which is called sport
to-day would inevitably give place in a better-educated world community to a
modification of the primitive instincts, that find expression in this way,
changing them into an interest not in the deaths, but in the lives of beasts,
and leading to fresh and perhaps very strange and beautiful attempts to befriend
these pathetic, kindred lower creatures we no longer fear as enemies, hate as
rivals, or need as slaves. And a world state and universal justice does not mean
the imprisonment of our race in any bleak institutional orderliness. There will
still be mountains and the sea, there will be jungles and great forests, cared
for indeed and treasured and protected; the great plains will still spread
before us and the wild winds blow. But men will not hate so much, fear so much,
nor cheat so desperately—and they will keep their minds and bodies cleaner.

There are unhopeful prophets who see in the gathering together of men into
one community the possibility of violent race conflicts, conflicts for
«ascendancy», but that is to suppose that civilization is incapable of
adjustments by which men of different qualities and temperaments and appearances
will live side by side, following different rules and contributing diverse
gifts. The weaving of mankind into, one community does not imply the creation of
a homogeneous community, but rather the reverse; the welcome and the adequate
utilization of distinctive quality in an atmosphere of, understanding. It is the
almost universal bad manners of the present age, which make race intolerable to
race. The community to which we may be moving will be more mixed—which does not
necessarily mean more interbred—more various and more interesting than any
existing community. Communities all to one pattern, like boxes of toy soldiers,
are things of the past rather than the future.

But one of the hardest, most impossible tasks a writer can set himself, is to
picture the life of people better educated, happier in their circumstances, more
free and more healthy than he is himself. We know enough to-day to know that
there is infinite room for betterment in every human concern. Nothing is needed
but collective effort. Our poverty, our restraints, our infections and
indigestions, our quarrels and misunderstandings, are all things controllable
and removable by concerted human action, but we know as little how life would
feel without them as some poor dirty ill-treated, fierce-souled creature born
and bred amidst the cruel and dingy surroundings of a European back street can
know what it is to bathe every day, always to be clad beautifully, to climb
mountains for pleasure, to fly, to meet none but agreeable, well-mannered
people, to conduct researches or make delightful things. Yet a time when all
such good things will be for all men may be coming more nearly than we think.
Each one who believes that brings the good time nearer; each heart that fails
delays it.

One cannot foretell the surprises or disappointments the future has in store.
Before this chapter of the World State can begin fairly in our histories, other
chapters as yet unsuspected may still need to be written, as long and as full of
conflict as our account of the growth and rivalries of the Great Powers. There
may be tragic economic struggles, grim grapplings, of race with race and class
with class. It may be that «private enterprise» will refuse to learn the lesson
of service without some quite catastrophic revolution, and that a phase of
confiscation and amateurish socialistic government lies before us. We do not
know; we cannot tell. These are unnecessary disasters, but they may be
unavoidable disasters. Human history becomes more and more a race between
education and catastrophe. Against the unifying effort of Christendom and
against the unifying influence of the mechanical revolution, catastrophe won—at
least to the extent of achieving the Great War. We cannot tell yet how much of
the winnings of catastrophe still remain to be gathered in. New falsities may
arise and hold men in some unrighteous and fated scheme of order for a time,
before they collapse amidst the miser and slaughter of generations.

Yet, clumsily or smoothly, the world, it seems, progresses and will progress.
In this *Outline* in our account of palaeolithic men, we have borrowed a
description from Mr. Worthington Smith of the very highest life in the world
some fifty thousand years ago. It was a bestial life. We have sketched, too, the
gathering for a human sacrifice, some fifteen thousand years ago. That scene
again is almost incredibly cruel to a modern civilized reader.

Yet it is not more than five hundred years since the great empire of the
Aztecs still believed that it could live only by the shedding of blood. Every
year in Mexico hundreds of human victims died in this fashion: The body was bent
like a bow over the curved stone of sacrifice, the breast was slashed open with
a knife of obsidian, and the priest tore out the beating heart of the still
living victim. The day may be close at hand when we shall no longer tear out the
hearts of men, even for the sake of our national gods. Let the reader but refer
to the earlier time charts we have given in this history, and he will see the
true measure and transitoriness of all the conflicts, deprivations, and miseries
of this present period of painful and yet hopeful change.
