
35.1 Princes and Foreign Policy
========================================================================
In the preceding chapter we have traced the beginnings of a new civilization,
the civilization of the «modern» type, which becomes at the present time
worldwide. It is still a vast unformed thing, still only in the opening phases
of growth and development today. We have seen the mediaeval ideas of the Holy
Roman Empire and of the Roman Church, as forms of universal law and order, fade
in its dawn. They fade out, as if it were necessary in order that these ideas of
one law and one order for all men should be redrawn on world-wide lines. And
while in nearly every other field of human interest there was advance, the
effacement of these general political ideas of the Church and Empire led back
for a time in things political towards merely personal monarchy and monarchist
nationalism of the Macedonian type. There came an interregnum, as it were, in
the consolidation of human affairs, a phase of the type the Chinese annalists
would call an «Age of Confusion». This interregnum has lasted as long as that
between the fall of the Western Empire and the crowning of Charlemagne in Rome.
We are living in it today. It may be drawing to its close; we cannot tell yet.
The old leading ideas had broken down, a medley of new and untried projects and
suggestions perplexed men's minds and actions, and meanwhile the world at large
had to fall back for leadership upon the ancient tradition of an individual
prince. There was no new way clearly apparent for men to follow, and the prince
was there.

All over the world the close of the sixteenth century saw monarchy prevailing
and tending towards absolutism. Germany and Italy were patchworks of autocratic
princely dominions, Spain was practically autocratic, the throne had never been
so powerful in England, and as the seventeenth century drew on, the French
monarchy gradually became the greatest and most consolidated power in Europe.
The phases and fluctuations of its ascent we cannot record here.

At every court there were groups of ministers and secretaries who played a
Machiavellian game against their foreign rivals. Foreign policy is the natural
employment of courts and monarchies. Foreign offices are, so to speak, the
leading characters in all the histories of the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries. They kept Europe in a fever of wars. And wars were becoming
expensive. Armies were no longer untrained levies, no longer assemblies of
feudal knights who brought their own horses and weapons and retainers with them;
they needed more and more artillery; they consisted of paid troops who insisted
on their pay; they were professional and slow and elaborate, conducting long
sieges, necessitating elaborate fortifications. War expenditure increased
everywhere and called for more and more taxation. And here it was that these
monarchies of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries came into conflict with
new and shapeless forces of freedom in the community. In practice the princes
found they were not masters of their subjects lives or property. They found an
inconvenient resistance to the taxation that was necessary if their diplomatic
aggressions and alliances were to continue. Finance became an unpleasant specter
in every council chamber. In theory the monarch owned his country. James I of
England (1603) declared that «As it is atheism and blasphemy to dispute what God
can do; so it is presumption and high contempt in a subject to dispute what a
king can do, or say that a king cannot do this or that». In practice, however,
he found, and his son Charles I (1625) was to find still more effectually, that
there were in his dominions a great number of landlords and merchants,
substantial and intelligent persons, who set a very definite limit to the calls
and occasions of the monarch and his ministers. They were prepared to tolerate
his rule if they themselves might also be monarchs of their lands and businesses
and trades and what not. But not otherwise.

Everywhere in Europe there was a parallel development. Beneath the kings and
princes there were these lesser monarchs, the private owners, noblemen, wealthy
citizens and the like, who were now offering the sovereign prince much the same
resistance that the kings and princes of Germany had offered the Emperor. They
wanted to limit taxation so far as it pressed upon them, and to be free in their
own houses and estates. And the spread of books and reading and
intercommunication was enabling these smaller monarchs, these monarchs of
ownership, to develop such a community of ideas and such a solidarity of
resistance as had been possible at no previous stage in the world's history.
Everywhere they were disposed to resist the prince, but it was not everywhere
that they found the same faculties for an organized resistance. The economic
circumstances and the political traditions of the Netherlands and England made
those countries the first to bring this antagonism of monarchy and private
ownership to an issue.

At first this seventeenth-century «public», this public of property owners,
cared very little for foreign policy. They did not perceive at first how it
affected them. They did not want to be bothered with it; it was, they conceded,
the affairs of kings and princes. They made no attempt therefore to control
foreign entanglements. But it was with the direct consequences of these
entanglements that they quarreled; they objected to heavy taxation, to
interference with trade, to arbitrary, imprisonment, and to the control of
consciences by the monarch. It was upon these questions that they joined issue
with the Crown.

