
35.10 Russia's Ride to the Pacific
========================================================================

.. _Figure 810:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0810.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0810.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 810

    Figure 810: Map â€” India in 1750

And while the great peninsula of the south of Asia was thus falling under the
dominion of the English sea traders, an equally remarkable reaction of Europe
upon Asia was going on in the north. We have told in Chap. XXXIII, Sec 5C, how
the Christian states of Russia recovered their independence from the Golden
Horde, and how the Tsar of Moscow became master of the republic of Novgorod; and
in Sec 5 of this chapter we have told of Peter the Great joining the circle of
Grand Monarchs and, as it were, dragging Russia into Europe. The rise of this
great central power of the old world, which is neither altogether, of the East
nor altogether of the West, is one of the utmost importance to our human
destiny. We have also told in the same chapter of the appearance of a Christian
steppe people, the Cossacks, who formed a barrier between the feudal agriculture
of Poland and Hungary to the west and the Tartar to the east. The Cossacks were
the wild east of Europe, and in many ways not unlike the Wild West of the United
States in the middle nineteenth century. All who had made Russia too hot to bold
them, criminals as well as the persecuted innocent, rebellious serfs, religious
sectaries, thieves, vagabonds, murderers, sought asylum in the southern steppes,
and there made a fresh start and fought for life and freedom against Pole,
Russian, and Tartar alike. Doubtless fugitives from the Tartars to the east also
contributed to the Cossack mixture. Chief among these new nomad tribes were the
Ukraine Cossacks on the Dnieper and the Don Cossacks on the Don. Slowly these
border folk were incorporated in the Russian imperial service, much as the
Highland clans of Scotland were converted into regiments by the British
government. New lands were offered them in Asia. They became a weapon against
the dwindling power of the Mongolian nomads, first in Turkestan and then across
Siberia as far as the Amur.

The decay of Mongol energy in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries is
very difficult to explain. Within two or three centuries from the days of Jengis
and Timurlane, central Asia had relapsed from a period of world ascendancy to
extreme political impotence. Changes of climate, unrecorded pestilences,
infections of a malarial type, may have played their part in this
recession-which may be only a temporary recession measured by the scale of
universal history of the Central Asian peoples.

Some authorities think that the spread of Buddhist teaching from China also
had a pacifying influence upon them. At any rate, by the sixteenth century the
Mongol Tartar and Turkish peoples were no longer pressing outward, but were
being invaded, subjugated, and pushed back both by Christian Russia in the west
and by China in the east.

All through the seventeenth century the Cossacks were spreading eastward from
European Russia, and settling wherever they found agricultural conditions.
Cordons of forts and stations formed 4 moving frontier to these settlements to
the south, where the Turkomans were still strong and active; to the northeast,
however, Russia had no frontier until she reached right to the Pacific . . .

At the same time China was in a phase of expansion. In 1644 the Ming Dynasty,
in a state of artistic decay and greatly weakened by a Japanese invasion, fell
to Manchu conquerors, a people apparently identical with the former Kin Dynasty,
which had ruled at Pekin over North China until the days of Jengis. It was the
Manchus who imposed the pigtail as a mark of political loyalty upon the Chinese
population. They brought a new energy into Chinese affairs, and their northern
interests led to a considerable northward expansion of the Chinese civilization
and influence into Manchuria and Mongolia. So it was that by the middle of the
eighteenth century the Russians and Chinese were in contact in Mongolia. At this
period China ruled eastern Turkestan, Tibet, Nepal, Burmah, and Annam . . .

We have mentioned a Japanese invasion of China (or rather of Korea). Except
for this aggression upon China, Japan plays no part in our history before the
nineteenth century. Like China under the Mings, Japan had set her face
resolutely against the interference of foreigners in her affairs. She was a
country leading her own civilized life, magically sealed against intruders. We
have told little of her hitherto because there was little to tell. Her
picturesque and romantic history stands apart from the general drama of human
affairs. Her population was chiefly a Mongolian population, with some very
interesting white people of a Nordic type, the Hairy Ainu, in the northern
islands. Her civilization seems to have been derived almost entirely from Korea
and China; her art is a special development of Chinese art, her writing an
adaptation of the Chinese script.

