
35.12 The Social Truce Draws to an End
========================================================================
One of the most interesting aspects of this story of Europe in the
seventeenth and earlier eighteenth century during the phase of the Grand and
Parliamentary Monarchies, is the comparative quiescence of the peasants and
workers. The insurrectionary fires of the fourteenth and fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries seem to have died down. The acute economic clashes, of the earlier
period had been mitigated by rough adjustments. The discovery of America had
revolutionized and changed the scale of business and industry, had brought a
vast volume of precious metal for money into Europe, had increased and varied
employment. For a time life and work ceased to be intolerable to the masses of
the poor. This did not, of course, prevent much individual misery and
discontent; the poor we have always had with us, but this misery and discontent
was divided and scattered. It became inaudible.

In the earlier period the common people had had an idea to crystallize upon,
the idea of Christian communism. They had found an educated leadership in the
dissentient priests and doctors of the Wycliffe type. As the movement for a
revival in Christianity spent its force, as Lutheranism fell back for leadership
from Jesus, upon the Protestant Princes, this conflict and reaction of the
fresher minds of the educated class upon the illiterate mass was interrupted.
However numerous a downtrodden class may be, and however extreme its miseries,
it will never be able to make an effective protest until it achieves solidarity
by the development of some common general idea. Educated men and men of ideas
are more necessary to a popular political movement than to any other political
process. A monarchy learns by ruling, and an oligarchy of any type has the
education of affairs; but the common man, the peasant or toiler, has no
experience in large matters, and can exist politically only through the
services, devotion, and guidance of educated men. The Reformation, the
Reformation that succeeded, the Reformation that is of the Princes, by breaking
up educational facilities, largely destroyed the poor scholar and priest class
whose persuasion of the crowd had rendered the Reformation possible.

The Princes of the Protestant countries, when they seized upon the national
churches early apprehended the necessity of gripping the universities also.
Their idea of education was the idea of capturing young clever people for the
service of their betters. Beyond that they were disposed to regard education as
a mischievous thing. The only way to an education, therefore, for a poor man was
through patronage. Of course there was a parade of encouragement towards
learning in all the Grand Monarchies, a setting up of Academies and Royal
Societies, but these benefited only a small class of subservient scholars. The
church also had learnt to distrust the educated poor man. In the great
aristocratic «crowned republic» of Britain there was the same shrinkage of
educational opportunity. «Both the ancient universities», says Hammond, in his
account of the eighteenth century, «were the universities of the rich. There is
a passage in Macaulay describing the state and pomp of Oxford at the end of the
seventeenth century when her Chancellor, the Venerable Duke of Ormonde, sat in
his embroidered mantle on his throne under the painted ceiling of the Sheldonian
theatre, surrounded by hundreds of graduates robed according to their rank,
while the noblest youths of England were solemnly presented to him as candidates
for academicals honors. The university was a power, not in the sense in which
that could be said of a university like the old university of Paris, whose
learning could make Popes tremble, but in the sense that the university was part
of the recognized machinery of aristocracy. What was true of the universities
was true of the public schools. Education in England was the nursery not of a
society, but of an order; not of a state, but of a race of owner rulers. The
missionary spirit had departed from education throughout Europe. To that quite
as much as to the amelioration of things by a diffused prosperity, this base of
quiescence among the lower classes is to be ascribed. They had lost brains and
speech, and they were fed. The community was like a pithed animal in the hands
of the governing class.\ [#fn7]_ 

Moreover, there had been considerable changes in the proportions of class to
class. One of the most difficult things for the historian to trace is the
relative amount of the total property of the community held at any time by any
particular class in that community. These things fluctuate very rapidly. The
peasant wars of Europe indicate a phase of comparatively concentrated property
when large masses of people could feel themselves expropriated and at a common
disadvantage, and so take mass action. This was the time of the rise and
prosperity of the Fuggers and their like, a time of international finance. Then
with the vast importation of silver and gold and commodities into Europe from
America, there seems to have been a restoration of a more diffused state of
wealth. The poor were just as miserable as ever, but there were perhaps not so
many poor relatively, and they were broken up into a variety of types without
any ideas in common. In Great Britain the agricultural life, which had been
dislocated by the confiscations of the Reformation had settled down again into a
system of tenant farming under great landowners. Side by side with the large
estates there was still, however, much common land for pasturing the beasts of
the poorer villagers, and much land cultivated in strips upon communal
lines.

The middling sort of man, and even the poorer sort of man upon the land, were
leading an endurable existence in 1700. The standard of life, the idea, that is,
of what is an endurable existence, was, however, rising during the opening phase
of Grand Monarchy; after a time the process of the upward concentration of
wealth seems to have been resumed, the larger landowners began to acquire and
crowd out the poorer free cultivators, and the proportion of poor people, and of
people who felt they were leading impoverished lives increased again. The bigger
men were unchallenged rulers of Great Britain, and they set themselves to enact
laws, the Enclosure Acts that practically confiscated the unenclosed and common
lands, mainly for the benefit of the larger landowners. The smaller men sank to
the level of wageworkers upon the land over which they had once possessed rights
of cultivation and pasture.

The peasant in France and upon the Continent generally, was not so
expropriated; his enemy was not the landlord, but the tax gatherer; he was
squeezed on his land instead of being squeezed off it.

As the eighteenth century progressed, it is apparent in the literature of the
time that what to do with «the poor» was again exercising men's thoughts. We
find such active-minded English writers as Defoe (1659-1731) and Fielding
(1707-54) deeply exercised by this problem. But as yet there is no such revival
of the communistic and equalitarian ideas of primitive Christianity as
distinguished the time of Wycliffe and John Huss. Protestantism in breaking up
the universal church had for a time broken up the idea of a universal human
solidarity. Even if the universal church of the Middle Ages had failed
altogether to realize that idea, it had at any rate been the symbol of that
idea.

Defoe and Fielding were men of a livelier practical imagination than Gibbon,
and they realized something of the economic processes that were afoot in their
time. So did Oliver Goldsmith (1728-74); his Deserted Village, (1770) is a
pamphlet on enclosures disguised as a poem. But Gibbon's circumstances had never
brought economic facts very vividly before his eyes; he saw the world as a
struggle between barbarism and civilization, but he perceived nothing of that
other struggle over which he floated, the mute, unconscious struggle of the
commonalty against able, powerful, rich, and selfish men. He did not perceive
the accumulation of stresses that were presently to strain and break up all the
balance of his «twelve powerful, though unequal, kingdoms», his «three
respectable commonwealths», and their rag, tag, and bobtail of independent minor
princes, reigning dukes, and so forth. Even the civil war that had begun in the
British colonies in America did not rouse him to the nearness of what we now
call «Democracy».

From what we have been saying hitherto, the reader may suppose that the
squeezing of the small farmer and the peasant off the land by the great
landowners, the mere grabbing of commons and the concentration of property in
the hands of a powerful privileged and greedy class, was all that was happening
to the English land in the eighteenth century. So we do but state the worse side
of the change. Concurrently with this change of ownership there was going on a
great improvement in agriculture. There can be little doubt that the methods of
cultivation pursued by the peasants, squatters, and small farmers were
antiquated, wasteful, and comparatively unproductive, and that the larger
private holdings and estates created by the Enclosure Acts were much more
productive (one authority says twenty times more productive) than the old ways.
The change was perhaps a necessary, one and the evil of it was not that it was
brought about, but that it was brought about so as to increase both wealth and
the numbers of the poor. Its benefits were intercepted by the bigger private
owners. The community was injured to the great profit of this class.

And here we come upon one of the chief problems of our lives at the present
time, the problem of the deflection of the profits of progress. For two hundred
years there has been, mainly under the influence of the spirit of science and
enquiry, a steady improvement in the methods of production of almost everything
that humanity requires. If our sense of community and our social science were
equal to the tasks required of them, there can be little question that this
great increment in production would have benefited the whole community, would
have given everyone an amount of education, leisure, and freedom such as mankind
had never dreamt of before. But though the common standard of living has risen,
the rise has been on a scale disproportionately small, the rich have developed a
freedom and luxury unknown in the world hitherto, and there has been an increase
in the proportion of rich people and stagnantly prosperous and unproductive
people in the community; but that also falls to account for the full benefit.
There has been much sheer waste. Vast accumulations of material and energy have
gone into warlike preparations and warfare. Much has been devoted to the futile
efforts of unsuccessful business corn, petition. Huge possibilities have
remained undeveloped because of, the opposition of owners, forestallers, and
speculators to their economical exploitation. The good things that science and
organization have been bringing within the reach of mankind have not been taken
methodically and used to their utmost, but they have been scrambled for,
snatched at, seized upon by gambling adventurers and employed upon selfish and
vain ends. The eighteenth century in Europe, and more particularly in Great
Britain and Poland, was the age of private ownership. «Private enterprise»,
which meant in practice that everyone was entitled to get everything he could
out of the business of the community, reigned supreme. No sense of obligation to
the state in business matters is to be found in the ordinary novels, plays, and
such-like representative literature of the time. Everyone is out «to make his
fortune», there is no recognition that it is wrong to be an unproductive
parasite on the community, and still less that a financier or merchant or
manufacturer can ever be overpaid for his services to mankind. This was the
moral atmosphere of the time, and those lords and gentlemen who grabbed the
people's commons, assumed possession of the mines under their lands, and crushed
down the yeoman farmers and peasants to the status of pauper laborers, had no
idea, that they were living anything but highly meritorious lives.

Concurrently with this change in Great Britain from traditional: patch
agriculture and common pasture to large and more scientific agriculture, very
great changes were going on in the manufacture of commodities. In these changes
Great Britain was, in, the eighteenth century, leading the world. Hitherto,
throughout the whole course of history from the beginnings of civilization,
manufactures, building, and industries generally had been in the hands of
craftsmen and small masters who worked in their own houses. They had been
organized in guilds, and were mostly their own employers. They formed an
essential and permanent middle class. There were capitalists among them, who let
out looms and the like, supplied material, and took the finished product, but
they were not big capitalists. There had been no rich manufacturers. The rich
men of the world before this time had been great landowners or moneylenders and
money manipulators or merchants. But in the eighteenth century, workers in
certain industries began to be collected together into factories in order to
produce things in larger quantities through a systematic division of labor, and
the employer, as distinguished from the master worker, began to be a person of
importance. Moreover, mechanical invention was producing machines that
simplified the manual work of production, and were capable of being driven by
waterpower and presently by steam. In 1765 Watt's steam engine was constructed,
a very important date in the history of industrialism.

The cotton industry was one of the first to pass into factory production
(originally with water-driven machinery). The woolen industry followed. At the
same time iron smelting, which had been restrained hitherto to small methods by
the use of charcoal, resorted to coke made from coal, and the coal and iron
industries also began to expand. The iron industry shifted from the wooded
country of Sussex and Surrey to the coal districts. By 1800 this changeover of
industry from a small-scale business with small employers to a large-scale
production under big employers was well in progress. Everywhere there sprang up
factories using first water, then steam power. It was a change of fundamental
importance in human economy. From the dawn of history the manufacturer and
craftsman had been, as we have said, a sort of middle-class townsman. The
machine and the employer now superseded his skill, and he either became an
employer of his fellows and grow towards wealth and equality with the other rich
classes, or he remained a worker and sank very rapidly to the level of a mere
laborer. This great change in human affairs is known as the Industrial
Revolution. Beginning in Great Britain, it spread during the nineteenth century
throughout the world.

As the Industrial Revolution went on, a great gulf opened between employer
and employed. In the past every manufacturing worker had the hope of becoming an
independent master. Even the slave craftsmen of Babylon and Rome were protected
by laws that enabled them to save and buy their freedom and to set up for
themselves. But now a factory and its engines and machines became a vast and
costly thing measured by the scale of the worker's pocket. Wealthy men had to
come together to create an enterprise; credit and plant, that is to say,
«Capital», were required. «Setting up for oneself» ceased to be a normal hope
for an artisan. The worker was henceforth a worker from the cradle to the grave.
Besides the landlords and merchants and the money-dealers who financed trading
companies and lent their money to the merchants and the state, there arose now
this new wealth of industrial capital a new sort of power in the state.

Of the working out of these beginnings we shall tell later. The immediate
effect of the industrial revolution upon the countries to which it came, was to
cause a vast, distressful shifting and stirring of the mute, uneducated,
leaderless, and now more and more property less common population. The small
cultivators and peasants, ruined and dislodged by the Enclosure Acts, drifted
towards the new manufacturing regions, and there they joined the families of the
impoverished and degraded craftsmen in the factories. Great towns of squalid
houses came into existence. Nobody seems to have noted clearly what was going on
at the time. It is the keynote of «private enterprise» to mind one's own
business, secure the utmost profit, and disregard any other consequences. Ugly
great factories grew up, built as cheaply as possible, to hold as many machines
and workers as possible. Around them gathered the streets of workers' homes,
built at the cheapest rate, without space, without privacy, barely decent, and
let at the utmost rent that could be exacted. These new industrial centres were
at first without schools, without churches . . .

The English gentleman of the closing decades of the eighteenth century read
Gibbon's third volume and congratulated himself that there was henceforth no
serious fear of the Barbarians, with this new barbarism growing up, with this
metamorphosis of his countrymen into something dark and desperate, in full
progress, within an easy walk perhaps of his door.

.. [#fn7] "Our present public school system is candidly based on training a dominant master class. But the uprising of the workers and modern conditions are rapidly making the dominant method unworkable, The change in the aim of schools will transform all the organizations and methods of schools, and my belief is that this change will make the new era"—F. W. Sanderson, Head Master of Oundle, in an address at Leeds, February 16th, 1920.
