
35.2 The Dutch Republic
========================================================================
The breaking away of the Netherlands from absolutist monarchy was the
beginning of a series of such conflicts throughout the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries. They varied very greatly in detail according to local and racial
peculiarities, but essentially they were all rebellious against the idea of a
predominating personal «prince» and his religious and political direction.

In the twelfth century all the lower Rhine country was divided up among a
number of small rulers, and the population was a low German one on a Celtic
basis, mixed with subsequent Danish ingredients very similar to the English
admixture. The southeastern fringe of it spoke French dialects; the bulk,
Frisian, Dutch, and other Low German languages. The Netherlands figured largely
in the crusades. Godfrey of Bouillon, who took Jerusalem (First Crusade), was a
Belgian; and the founder of the so-called Latin Dynasty of emperors, in
Constantinople (Fourth Crusade) was Baldwin of Flanders. (They were called Latin
emperors because they were on the side of the Latin Church. In the thirteenth
and fourteenth centuries considerable towns grew up in the Netherlands: Ghent,
Bruges, Ypres, Utrecht, Leyden, Haarlem, and so forth; and these towns developed
quasi-independent municipal governments and a class of educated townsmen. We
will not trouble the reader with the dynastic accidents that linked the affairs
of the Netherlands with Burgundy (Eastern France), and which finally made their
overlordship the inheritance of the Emperor Charles V.

It was under Charles that the Protestant doctrines that now prevailed in
Germany spread into the Netherlands. Charles persecuted with some vigour, but in
1556, as we have, told, he handed over the task to his son Philip (Philip II).
Philip's spirited foreign policy he was carrying on a war with France presently
became a second source of trouble between himself and the Netherlandish noblemen
and townsmen, because he had to come to them for supplies. The great nobles led
by William the Silent, Prince of Orange, and the Counts of Egmont and Horn, made
themselves the heads of a popular resistance, in which it is now impossible to
disentangle the objection, to taxation from the objection to religious
persecution. The great nobles were not at first Protestants. They became
Protestants as the struggle grew in bitterness. The people were often bitterly
Protestant.

Philip was resolved to rule both the property and consciences of his
Netherlanders. He sent picked Spanish troops into, the country, and he made
governor general a nobleman named Alva, one of those ruthless «strong» men who
wreck governments and monarchies. For a time he ruled the land with a hand of
iron, but the hand of iron begets a soul of iron in the body it grips, and in
1567 the Netherlands were in open revolt. Alva murdered, sacked, and massacred
in vain. Counts Egmont and Horn were executed. William the Silent became the
great leader of the Dutch, a king de facto. For a long time, and with many
complications, the struggle for liberty continued, and through it all it is
noteworthy that the rebels continued to cling to the plea that. Philip II was
their king-if only he would be a reasonable and limited king. But the idea of
limited monarchy was distasteful to the crowned heads of Europe at that time,
and at last Philip drove the United Provinces, for which we now use the name of
Holland, to the republican form of government. Holland, be it noted not all the
Netherlands; the southern Netherlands, Belgium as we now call that country,
remained at the end of the struggle a Spanish possession and Catholic.

The siege of Alkmaar (1573), as Motley\ [#fn1]_  describes it, may be taken as a
sample of that long and hideous conflict between the little Dutch people and the
still vast resources of Catholic Imperialism.

«'If I take Alkmaar,' Alva wrote to Philip, 'I am resolved net to leave a
single creature alive; the knife shall be put to every throat.'...

«And now, with the dismantled and desolate Haarlem before their eyes, a
prophetic phantom, perhaps, of their own imminent fate, did the handful of
people shut up within Alkmaar prepare for the worst. Their main hope lay in the
friendly sea. The vast sluices called the Zyp, through which the inundation of
the whole northern province could be very soon effected, were but a few miles
distant. By opening these gates, and by piercing a few dykes, the ocean might be
made to fight for them. To obtain this result, however, the consent of the
inhabitants was requisite, as the destruction of all the standing crops would be
inevitable. The city was so closely invested, that it was a matter of life and
death to venture forth, and it was difficult, therefore, to find an envoy for
this hazardous mission. At last, a carpenter in the city, Peter Van der Mey by
name, undertook the adventure . . .

«Affairs soon approached a crisis within the beleaguered city.
Daily skirmishes, without decisive results, had taken place outside the
walls. At last, on the 18th of September, after a steady cannonade of nearly
twelve hours, Don Frederick, at three in the afternoon, ordered an assault.
Notwithstanding his seven months' experience at Haarlem, he still believed it
certain that he should carry Alkmaar by storm. The attack took place at once
upon the Frisian gate and upon the red tower on the opposite side. Two choice
regiments, recently arrived from Lombardy, led the onset, rending the air with
their shouts and confident of an easy victory. They were sustained by what
seemed an overwhelming force of disciplined troops. Yet never, even in the
recent history of Haarlem, had an attack been received by more dauntless
breasts. Every living man was on the walls. The storming parties were assailed
with cannon, with musketry, with pistols. Boiling water, pitch and oil, molten
lead, and unslaked lime were poured upon them every moment. Hundreds of tarred
and burning hoops were skillfully quoited around the necks of the soldiers, who
struggled in vain to extricate themselves from these fiery ruffs, while as fast
as any of the invaders planted foot upon the breach, they were confronted face
to face with sword and dagger by the burghers, who hurled them headlong into the
moat below.

«Thrice was the attack renewed with ever increasing rage thrice repulsed with
unflinching fortitude. The storm continued four hours long. During all that
period not one of the defenders left his post, till he dropped from it dead or
wounded . . . The trumpet of recall was sounded, and the Spaniards, utterly
discomfited, retired from the walls, leaving at least one thousand dead in the
trenches, while only thirteen burghers and twenty-four of the garrison lost
their lives . . . Ensign Solis, who had mounted the breach for an instant, and
miraculously escaped with life, after having been hurled from the battlements,
reported that he had seen «neither helmet nor harness» as he looked down into
the city: only some plain-looking people, generally dressed like fishermen. Yet
these plain-looking fishermen had defeated the veterans of Alva . . .

«Meantime, as Governor Sonoy had opened many of the dykes, the land in the
neighborhood of the camp was becoming plashy, although as yet the threatened
inundation had not taken place. The soldiers were already very uncomfortable and
very refractory. The carpenter-envoy had not been idle . . ».

He returned with dispatches for the city. By accident or contrivance he lost
these dispatches as he made his way into the town, so that they fell into Alva's
hands. They contained a definite promise from the Duke of Orange to flood the
country so as to drown the whole Spanish army. Incidentally this would also have
drowned most of the Dutch harvest and cattle. But Alva, when he had read these
documents, did not wait for the opening of any more sluices. Presently the stout
men of Alkmaar, cheering and jeering, watched the Spaniards breaking camp . .
.

The form assumed by the government of liberated Holland was a patrician
republic under the headship of the house of Orange. The States-General was far
less representative of the whole body of citizens than was the English
Parliament we shall next relate.

Though the worst of the struggle was over after Alkmaar, Holland was not
effectively independent until 1609, and its independence was only fully and
completely recognized by the treaty of Westphalia in 1648.

.. [#fn1] :t:`Rise of the Dutch Republic`
