
35.3 The English Republic
========================================================================
The open struggle of the private property owner against the aggressions of
the «Prince» begins in England far back in the twelfth century. The phase in
this struggle that we have to study now is the phase that opened with the
attempts of Henry VII and VIII and their successors, Edward VI, Mary and
Elizabeth, to make the government of England a «personal monarchy» of the
continental type. It became more acute when, by dynastic accidents, James, King
of Scotland, became James I, King of both Scotland and England (1603), and began
to talk in the manner we have already quoted of his «divine right» to do as he
pleased. But never had the path of English monarchy been a smooth one. In all
the monarchies of the Northmen and Germanic invaders of the empire there had
been a tradition of a popular assembly of influential and representative men to
preserve their general liberties, and in none was it more living than in
England. France had her tradition of the assembly of the Three Estates, Spain
her Cortes, but the English assembly was peculiar in two respects; that it had
behind it a documentary declaration of certain elementary and universal rights,
and that it contained elected «Knights of the Shire», as well as elected
burghers from the towns. The French and Spanish assemblies had the latter, but
not the former element.

These two features gave the English Parliament a peculiar strength in its
struggle, with the Throne. The document in question was Magna Carta, the Great
Charter, a declaration, which was forced from King John (1199-1216), the brother
and successor of Richard Coeur de Lion (1189-99), after a revolt of the Barons
in 1215. It rehearsed a number of fundamental rights that made England a legal
and not a regal state. It rejected the power of the king to control the personal
property and liberty of every sort of citizen save with the consent of that
man's equals.

The presence of the elected shire representatives in the English Parliament,
the second peculiarity of the British situation, came about from very simple and
apparently innocuous beginnings. From the shires, or county divisions, knights
seem to have been summoned to the national council to testify to the taxable
capacity of their districts. They were sent up by the minor gentry, freeholders
and village elders of their districts as early as 1254, two knights from each
shire This idea inspired Simon de Montfort,\ [#fn2]_  who was in rebellion against
Henry III, the successor of John, to summon to the national council two knights
from each shire and two citizens from each city or borough. Edward I, the
successor to Henry III, continued this practice because it seemed a convenient
way of getting into financial touch with the growing towns. At first there was
considerable reluctance on the parts of the knights and townsmen to attend
Parliament, but gradually the power they possessed of linking the redress of
grievances with the granting of subsidies was realized. Quite early, if not from
the first, these representatives of the general property owners in town and
country, the Commons, sat and debated apart from the great Lords and Bishops. So
there grew up in England a representative assembly, the Commons, beside an
Episcopal and patrician one, the Lords. There was no profound and fundamental
difference between the personnel of the two assemblies; many of the knights of
the shire were substantial men who might be as wealthy and influential as peers
and also the sons and brothers of peers, but on the whole the Commons was the
more plebeian assembly.

From the first these two assemblies, and especially the Commons, displayed a
disposition to claim the entire power of taxation in the land. Gradually they
extended their purview of grievances to a criticism of all the affairs of the
realm. We will not follow the fluctuations of the power and prestige of the
English Parliament through the time of the Tudor monarchs (i.e., Henry VII and
VIII, Edward VI, Mary and Elizabeth), but it will be manifest from what has been
said that when at last James Stuart made his open claim to autocracy, the
English merchants, peers, and private gentlemen found themselves with a tried
and honored traditional means of resisting him such as no other people in Europe
possessed.

Another peculiarity of the English political conflict was its comparative
detachment from the great struggle between Catholic and Protestant that was now
being waged all over Europe. There were, it is true, very distinct religious
issues mixed up in the English struggle, but upon its main lines it was a
political struggle of King against the Parliament embodying the class of private
property owning citizens. Both Crown and people were formally reformed and
Protestant. It is true that many people on the latter side were Protestants of a
Bible respecting, non- sacerdotal type, representing the reformation according
to the peoples, and that the king was the nominal head of a special sacerdotal
and sacramental church, the established Church of England, representing the
reformation according to the princes, but this antagonism never completely
obscured the essentials of the conflict.

The struggle of King and Parliament had already reached an acute phase before
the death of James I (1625), but only in the reign of his son Charles I did it
culminate in civil war. Charles did exactly what one might have expected a king
to do in such a position, in view of the lack of Parliamentary control over
foreign policy; be embroiled the country in a conflict with both Spain and
France, and then came to the country for supplies in the hope that patriotic
feeling would override the normal dislike to giving him money. When Parliament
refused supplies, he demanded loans from various subjects, and attempted similar
illegal exactions. This produced from Parliament in 1628 a very memorable
document, the *Petition of Right,* citing the Great Charter and rehearsing
the legal limitations upon the power of the English king, denying his right to
levy charges upon, or to imprison, or punish anyone, or to quarter soldiers on
the people, without due process of law. The Petition of Right stated the case of
the English Parliament. The disposition to «state a me» has always been a very
marked English characteristic. When President Wilson, during the Great War of
1914-18, prefaced each step in his policy by a «Note», he was walking in the
most respectable traditions of the English. Charles dealt with this Parliament
with a high hand, he dismissed it in 1629, and for eleven years he summoned no
Parliament. He levied money illegally, but not enough for his purpose; and
realizing that the church could be used as an instrument of obedience, he made
Laud, an aggressive high churchman, very much of a priest and a very strong
believer in «divine right», Archbishop of Canterbury, and so head of the Church
of England.

In 1638 Charles tried to extend the half-Protestant, half-Catholic
characteristics of the Church of England to his other kingdom of Scotland, where
the secession from Catholicism had been more complete, and where a
non-sacerdotal, non- sacramental form of Christianity, Presbyterianism, had been
established as the national church. The Scotch revolted, and the English levies
Charles raised to fight them mutinied. Insolvency, at all times the natural
result of a «spirited» foreign policy, was close at hand. Charles, without money
or trustworthy troops, had to summon a Parliament at last in 1640. This
Parliament, the Short Parliament, he dismissed in the same year; he tried a
Council of Peers at York (1640), and then in the November of that year summoned
his last Parliament.

This body, the Long Parliament, assembled in the mood for conflict. It seized
Laud, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and charged him with treason. It published a
«Grand Remonstrance», which was a long and full statement of its case against
Charles. It provided by a bill for a meeting of Parliament at least once in
three years, whether the King summoned it or no. It prosecuted the King's chief
ministers who had helped him to reign for so long without Parliament, and in
particular the Earl of Strafford. To save Strafford the King plotted for a
sudden seizure of London by the army. This was discovered, and the Bill for
Strafford's condemnation was hurried on in the midst of a vast popular
excitement. Charles I, who was probably one of the meanest and most treacherous
occupants the English throne has ever known, was frightened by the London
crowds. Before Strafford could die by due legal process, it was necessary for
the King to give his assent. Charles gave it and Strafford was beheaded.
Meanwhile the King was plotting and looking for help in strange quarters from
the Catholic Irish, from treasonable Scotchmen. Finally he resorted to a
forcible feeble display of violence. He went down to the Houses of Parliament to
arrest five of his most active opponents. He entered the House of Commons and
took the Speaker's chair. He was prepared with some bola speech about treason,
but when he saw the places of his five antagonists vacant, he was baffled,
confused, and spoke in broken sentences. He learnt that they had departed from
his royal city of Westminster and taken refuge in the city of London (see Chap.
XXIV, sec 7). London defied him. A week later the Five Members were escorted
back in triumph to the Parliament House in Westminster by the Trained Bands of
London, and the King, to avoid the noise and hostility of the occasion, left
Whitehall for Windsor.

Both parties then prepared openly for war.

The King was the traditional head of the army, and the habit of obedience in
soldiers is to the King. The Parliament had the greater resources. The King set
up his standard at Nottingham on the eve of a dark and stormy August day in
1642. There followed a long and obstinate civil war, the King holding Oxford,
the Parliament, and London. Success swayed from side to side, but the King could
never close on London nor Parliament takes Oxford. Each antagonist was weakened
by moderate adherents who «did not want to go too far». There emerged among the
Parliamentary commanders a certain Oliver Cromwell, who had raised a small troop
of horse and who rose to the position of general. Lord Warwick, his
contemporary, describes him as a plain man, in a cloth suit «made by an ill
country tailor». He was no mere fighting soldier, but a, military organizer; he
realized the inferior quality of many of the Parliamentary forces, and set
himself to remedy it. The Cavaliers of the King had the picturesque tradition of
chivalry and loyalty on their side; Parliament was something new and difficult
without any comparable traditions. «Your troops are most of them old decayed
serving men and tapsters», said Cromwell. «Do you think that the spirits of such
base and mean fellows will ever be able to encounter gentlemen that have honor
and courage and resolution in them?» But there is something better and stronger
than picturesque chivalry in the, world, religious enthusiasm. He set himself to
get together a «godly» regiment. They were to be earnest, sober living men.
Above all, they were to be men of strong convictions. He disregarded all social
traditions, and drew his officers from every class. «I had rather have a plain,
russet coated captain that knows what he fights for and loves what he knows,
than what you call a gentleman and is nothing else». England discovered a new
force, the Ironsides, in its midst, in which footmen, draymen, and ships
captains held high command, side by side with men of family. They became the
type on which the Parliament sought to reconstruct its entire army. The
Ironsides were the backbone of this «New Model». From Marston Moor to Naseby
these men swept the Cavaliers before them. The King was at last a captive in the
hands of Parliament.

There were still attempts at settlement that would have left the King a sort
of king, but Charles was a man doomed to tragic issues, incessantly scheming,
«so false a man that he is not to be trusted'' The English were drifting towards
a situation new in the world's history, in which a monarch should be formally
tried for treason to his people and condemned.

Most revolutions are precipitated, as this English one was, by the excesses
of the ruler, and by attempts at strength and firmness beyond the compass of the
law; and most revolutions swing by a kind of necessity towards an extremer
conclusion than is warranted by the original quarrel. The English revolution was
no exception. The English are by nature a compromising and even a vacillating
people, and probably the great majority of them still wanted the King to be King
and the people to be free, and all the lions and lambs to lie down together in
peace and liberty. But the army of the New Model could not go back. There would
have been scant mercy for these draymen and footmen who had ridden down the
King's gentlemen if the King came back. When Parliament began to treat again
with this regal trickster, the New Model intervened; Colonel Pride turned out
eighty members from the House of Commons who favored the King, and the illegal
residue, the Rump Parliament, then put the King on trial.

But indeed the King was already doomed. The House of Lords rejected the
ordinance for the trial, and the Rump then proclaimed «that the People are,
under God, the original of all just power», and that «the Commons of England . .
. have the supreme power in this nation», and assuming that it was itself the
Commons proceeded with the trial. The King was condemned as a «tyrant, traitor,
murderer, and enemy of his country». He was taken one January morning in 1649 to
a scaffold erected outside the windows of his own banqueting room at Whitehall.
There he was beheaded. He died with piety and a certain noble self-pity-eight
years after the execution of Strafford, and after six and a half years of a
destructive civil war, which had been caused almost entirely by his own
lawlessness.

This was indeed a great and terrifying thing that Parliament had done. The
like of it had never been heard of in the world before. Kings had killed each
other times enough; parricide, fratricide, assassination, those are the
privileged expedients of princes; but that a section of the people should rise
up, try its king solemnly and deliberately for disloyalty, mischief, and
treachery, and condemn and kill him, sent horror through every court in Europe.
The Rump Parliament had gone beyond the ideas and conscience of its time. It was
as if a committee of jungle deer had taken and killed a tiger a crime against
nature. The Tsar of Russia chased the English envoy from his court. France and
Holland committed acts of open hostility. England, confused and conscience
stricken at her own sacrilege, stood isolated before the world.

But for a time the personal quality of Oliver Cromwell and the discipline and
strength of the army he had created maintained England in the republican course
she had taken. The Irish Catholics had made a massacre of the Protestant English
in Ireland, and now Cromwell suppressed the Irish insurrection with great
vigour. Except for certain friars at the storm of Drogheda, none but men with
arms in their hands were killed by his troops; but the atrocities of the
massacre were fresh in his mind, no quarter was given in battle, and so his
memory still rankles in the minds of the Irish, who have a long memory for their
own wrongs. After Ireland came Scotland, where Cromwell shattered a Royalist
army at the Battle of Dunbar (1650). Then he turned his attention to Holland,
which country had rashly seized upon the divisions among the English as an
excuse for the injury of a trade rival. The Dutch were then the rulers of the
sea, and the English fleet fought against odds; but after a series of obstinate
sea fights the Dutch were driven from the British seas and the English took
their place as the ascendant naval power. Dutch and French ships must dip their
flags to them. An English fleet went into the Mediterranean- the first English
naval force to enter those waters; it put right various grievances of the
English shippers with Tuscany and Malta, and bombarded the pirate nest of
Algiers and destroyed the pirate fleet which in the lax days of Charles had been
wont to come right up to the coasts of Cornwall and Devon to intercept ships and
carry off slaves to Africa. The strong arm of England also intervened to protect
the Protestants in the south of France, who were being hunted to death by the
Duke of Savoy. France, Sweden, Denmark, all found it wiser to overcome their
first distaste for regicide and allied them with England. Came a war with Spain,
and the great English Admiral Blake destroyed the Spanish Plate Fleet at
Teneriffe in an action of almost incredible daring. He engaged land batteries.
He was the first man «that brought ships to contemn castles on the, shore». (He
died in 1657, and was buried in Westminster Abbey, but after the restoration of
the monarchy his bones were dug out by the order of Charles II, and removed to
St. Margaret's, Westminster.) Such was the figure that England cut in the eyes
of the world during her brief republican days.

On September 3rd, 1658, Cromwell died in the midst of a great storm that did
not fail to impress the superstitious. Once his strong hand lay still, England
fell away from this premature attempt to realize a righteous commonweal of free
men. In 1660 Charles II, the son of Charles the «Martyr», was welcomed back to
England with all those manifestations of personal loyalty dear to the English
heart, and the country relaxed from its military and naval efficiency as a
sleeper might wake and stretch and yawn after too intense a dream. The Puritans
were done with «Merrie England» was herself again, and in 1667 the Dutch, once
more masters of the sea, sailed up the Thames to Gravesend and burnt an English
fleet in the Medway. «On the night when our ships were burnt by the Dutch», says
Pepys, in his diary, «the King did sup with my Lady Castelmaine, and there they
were all mad, hunting a poor moth». Charles, from the date of his return, 1660,
took control of the foreign affairs of the state, and in 1670 concluded a secret
treaty with Louis XIV of France by which he undertook to subordinate entirely
English foreign policy to that of France for an annual pension of 100,000.
Dunkirk, which Cromwell had taken, had already been sold back to France. The
King was a great sportsman; he had the true English love for watching horse
races, and the racing centre at Newmarket is perhaps his most characteristic
monument.

While Charles lived, his easy humor enabled him to retain the British crown,
but he did so by wariness and. compromise, and when in 1685 he was succeeded by
his brother James II, who was a devout Catholic, and too dull to recognize the
hidden limitation of the monarchy in Britain, the old issue between Parliament
and Crown became acute. James set himself to force his country into a religious
reunion with Rome. In 1688 he was in flight to France. But this time the great
lords and merchants and gentlemen were too circumspect to let this revolt
against the King fling them into the hands of a second Pride or a second
Cromwell. They had already called in another king, William, Prince of Orange, to
replace James. The change was made rapidly. There was no civil war except in
Ireland and no release of the deeper revolutionary forces of the country.

Of William's claim to the throne, or rather of his wife Mary's claim, we
cannot tell here, its interest is purely technical, nor how William: III and
Mary ruled, nor how, after the widower William had reigned alone for a time, the
throne passed on to Mary's sister Anne (1702-14). Anne seems to have thought
favorably of a restoration of the Stuart line, but the Lords and the Commons,
who now dominated English affairs, preferred a less competent king. Some sort of
claim could be made out for the Elector of Hanover, who became King of England
as George I (1714-27). He was entirely German, he could speak no English, and he
brought a swarm of German women and German attendants to the English court;
dullness, tarnish came over the intellectual life of the land with his
coming,

But this isolation of the court from English life was his conclusive
recommendation to the great landowners and the commercial interests who chiefly
brought him over. England entered upon a phase which Lord Beaconsfield has
called the «Venetian oligarchy» stage; the supreme power resided in Parliament,
dominated now by the Lords, for the art of bribery and a study of the methods of
working elections carried to a high pitch by Sir Robert Walpole had robbed the
House of Commons of its original freedom and vigour. By ingenious devices the
parliamentary vote was restricted to a shrinking number of electors, old towns
with little or no population would return one or two members (old Sarum had one
non-resident voter, no population, and two members), while newer populous
centres had no representation at all. And by insisting upon a high property
qualification for members, the chance of the Commons speaking in common accents
of vulgar needs was still more restricted. George I was followed by the very
similar George II (1727-60), and it was only at his death that England had again
a king who had been born in England, and one who could speak English fairly
well, his grandson George III. On this monarch's attempt to recover some of the
larger powers of monarchy we shall have something to say in a later section.

Such briefly is the story of the struggle in England during the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries between the three main. factors in the problem of the
«modern state»; between the crown, the private property owners, and that vague
power, still blind and ignorant, the power of the quite common people. This
latter factor appears as yet only at moments when the country is most deeply
stirred; then it sinks back into the depths. But the end of the story, thus far,
is a very complete triumph of the British private property owner over the dreams
and schemes of Machiavellian absolutism. With the Hanoverian Dynasty, England
became as the Times recently styled her a «crowned republic». She had worked out
a new method of government, Parliamentary government, recalling in many ways the
Senate and Popular Assembly of Rome, but more steadfast and efficient because of
its use, however restricted, of the representative method. Her assembly at
Westminster was to become the «Mother of Parliaments» throughout the world.
Towards the, crown the English Parliament has held and still holds much the
relation of the mayor of the palace to the Merovingian kings. The king is
conceived of as ceremonial and irresponsible, a living symbol of the royal and
imperial system. But much power remains latent in the tradition and prestige of
the crown, and the succession of the four Hanoverian Georges, William IV (1830),
Victoria (1837), Edward VII (1901), and the present king, George V (1910), is of
a quite different strain from the feeble and short-lived Merovingian monarchs.
In the affairs of the church, the military and naval organizations, and the
foreign office, these sovereigns have all in various degrees exercised an
influence, which is nonetheless important because it is indefinable.

.. [#fn2]  This is not the same Simon de Montfort as the leader of the crusades against Albigenses, but his son.
