
35.4 The Break-up and Disorder of Germany
========================================================================

.. _Figure 784:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0784.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0784.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 784

    Figure 784: Map — Europe after the Peace of Westphalia, 1648

Upon no part of Europe did the collapse of the idea of a unified Christendom
bring more disastrous consequences than to Germany. Naturally one would have
supposed that the Emperor, being by origin a German, both in the case of the
earlier lines and in the case of the Habsburgs, would have developed into the
national monarch of a united German speaking state. It was the accidental
misfortune of Germany that her Emperors never remained German. Frederick II, the
last Hohenstaufen, was, as we have seen, a half-orientalized Sicilian; the
Habsburgs, by marriage and inclination, became in the person of Charles V, first
Burgundian and then Spanish in spirit. After the death of Charles V, his brother
Ferdinand took Austria and the empire, and his son Philip II took Spain, the
Netherlands, and South Italy; but the Austrian line, obstinately Catholic,
holding its patrimony mostly on the eastern frontiers, deeply entangled
therefore with Hungarian affairs and paying tribute, as Ferdinand and his two
successors did, to the Turk, retained no grip upon the north Germans with their
disposition towards Protestantism, their Baltic and westward affinities, and
their ignorance of or indifference to the Turkish danger.

The sovereign princes, dukes, electors, prince bishops and the like, whose
domains cut up the map of The Germany of the Middle Ages into a crazy patchwork,
were really not the equivalents of the kings of England and France; They were
rather on the level of the great land owning dukes and peers of France and
England. Until 1701 none of them had the title of «King». Many of their
dominions were less both in size and value than the larger estates of the
British nobility. The German Diet was like the States-General or like a
parliament without the presence of elected representatives. So that the great
civil war in Germany that presently broke out, the Thirty Years' War (1618-48)
was in its essential nature much more closely akin to the civil war in England
(1643-49) and to the war of the Fronde (1648- 53), the league of feudal nobles
against the Crown in France, than appears upon the surface.

In all these cases the Crown was either Catholic or disposed to become
Catholic, and the recalcitrant nobles found their individualistic disposition
tending to a Protestant formula. But while in England and Holland the Protestant
nobles and rich merchants ultimately, triumphed and in France the success of the
Crown was even more complete, in Germany neither was the Emperor strong enough,
nor had the Protestant princes a sufficient unity and organization among
themselves to secure a conclusive triumph. It ended there in a torn-up Germany.
Moreover, the German issue was complicated by the fact that various non-German
peoples, the Bohemians and the Swedes (who had a new Protestant monarchy which
had arisen under Gustava Vasa as a direct result of the Reformation), were
entangled in the struggle. Finally, the French monarchy, triumphant now over its
own nobles, although it was Catholic, came in on the Protestant side with the
evident intention of taking the place of the Habsburgs as, the imperial
line.

The prolongation of the war, and the fact that it was not fought along a
determinate frontier, but all over an empire of patches, Protestant here,
Catholic there, made it one of the most cruel and destructive that Europe had
known since the days of the barbarian raids. Its peculiar mischief lay not in
the fighting, but in the concomitants of the fighting. It came at a time when
military tactics had developed to a point that rendered ordinary levies useless
against trained professional infantry. Volley firing with muskets at a range of
a few score yards had abolished the individualistic knight in Armour, but the
charge of disciplined masses of cavalry could still disperse any infantry that
had not been drilled into a mechanical rigidity. The infantry with their
muzzle-loading muskets could not keep up a steady enough fire to wither
determined cavalry before it charged home. They had, therefore, to meet the
shock standing or kneeling behind a bristling wall of pikes or bayonets. For
this they needed great discipline and experience. Iron cannon were still of
small size and not very abundant, and they did not play a decisive part as yet
in warfare. They could «plough lanes» in infantry, but they could not easily
smash and scatter it if it was sturdy and well drilled. War under these
conditions was entirely in the hands of seasoned professional soldiers, and the
question of their pay was as important a one to the generals of that time as the
question of food or munitions. As the long struggle dragged on from phase to
phase, and the financial distress of the land increased, the commanders of both
sides were forced to fall back upon the looting of towns and villages, both for
supply and to make up the arrears of their soldiers' pay.

The soldiers became, therefore, more and more mere brigands living on the
country, and the Thirty Years War set up a tradition of looting as a legitimate
operation in warfare and of outrage as a soldier's privilege that has tainted
the good name of Germany right down to the Great War of 1914*.* The earlier
chapters of Defoe's *Memoirs of a Cavalier,* with its vivid description of
the massacre and burning of Magdeburg, will give the reader a far better idea of
the warfare of this time than any formal history. So harried was the land that
the farmers ceased from cultivation, what snatch crops could be harvested were
hidden away, and great crowds of starving women and children became camp
followers of the armies, and supplied a thievish tail to the rougher plundering.
At the close of the struggle all Germany was ruined and desolate. Central Europe
did not fully recover from these robberies and devastations for a century.

Here we can but name Tilly and Wallenstein, the great plunder captains on the
Habsburg side, and Gustavus Adolphus, the King of Sweden, the Lion of the North,
the champion of the Protestants, whose dream was to make the Baltic Sea a
«Swedish Lake». Gustavus Adolphus was killed in his decisive victory over
Wallenstein at Lutzen (1632), and Wallenstein was murdered in 1634. In 1648 the
princes and diplomatists gathered amidst the havoc they had made to patch up the
affairs of Central Europe at the Peace of Westphalia. By that peace the power of
the Emperor was reduced to a shadow, and the acquisition of Alsace brought
France up to the Rhine. And one German prince, the Hohenzollern Elector of
Brandenburg, acquired so much territory as to become the greatest German power
next to the Emperor, a power that presently (1701) became the kingdom of
Prussia. The Treaty also recognized two long accomplished facts, the separation
from the empire and the complete independence of both Holland and
Switzerland.

