
35.5 The Splendours of Grand Monarchy in Europe
========================================================================

.. _Figure 787:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0787.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0787.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 787

    Figure 787: Louis XIV

We have opened this chapter with the stories of two countries, the
Netherlands and Britain, in which the resistance of the private citizen to this
new type of monarchy, the Machiavellian monarchy that was arising out of the
moral collapse of Christendom, succeeded. But in France, Russia, in many parts
of Germany and of Italy-Saxony and Tuscany e.g. personal monarchy was not so
restrained and overthrown; it established itself indeed as the ruling European
system during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. And even, in Holland and
Britain the monarchy was recovering power during the eighteenth century. 

(In Poland conditions were peculiar, and they will be dealt with in a later
section.) 

In France there had been no Magna Carta, and there was not quite so definite
and effective a tradition of parliamentary rule. There was the same opposition
of interests between the crown on the one hand and the landlords and merchants
on the other, but the latter had no recognized gathering place, and no dignified
method of unity. They formed oppositions to the crown, they made leagues of
resistance such was the «Fronde,» which was struggling against the young King
Louis XIV and his great minister Mazarin, while Charles I was fighting for his
life in England but ultimately (1652), after a civil war, they were conclusively
defeated; and while in England after the establishment of the Hanoverians the
House of Lords and their subservient Commons ruled the country, in France, on
the contrary, after 1652, the court entirely dominated the aristocracy. Cardinal
Mazarin was himself building upon a foundation that Cardinal Richelieu, the
contemporary of King James I of England, had prepared for him. After the time of
Mazarin we hear of no great French nobles unless they are at court as court
servants and officials. They have been tamed but at a price, the price of
throwing the burthen of taxation upon the voiceless mass of the common people.
From many taxes both the clergy and the nobility—everyone indeed who bore a
title—were exempt. In the end this injustice became intolerable, but for a while
the French monarchy flourished like the Psalmist’s green bay tree. By the
opening of the eighteenth century English writers are already calling attention
to the misery of the French lower classes and the comparative prosperity, at
that time, of the English poor. 

On such terms of unrighteousness what we may call «Grand Monarchy»
established itself in France. Louis XIV, styled the Grand Monarque, reigned for
the unparalleled length of seventy-two years (1643-1715), and set a pattern for
all the kings of Europe. At first he was guided by his Machiavellian minister,
Cardinal Mazarin; after the death of the Cardinal he himself in his own proper
person became the ideal «Prince.» He was, within his limitations, an
exceptionally capable king; his ambition was stronger than his baser passions,
and he guided his country towards bankruptcy, through the complication of a
spirited foreign policy, with an elaborate dignity that still extorts our
admiration. His immediate desire was to consolidate and extend France to the
Rhine and Pyrenees, and to absorb the Spanish Netherlands; his remoter view saw
the French kings as the possible successors of Charlemagne in a recast Holy
Roman Empire. He made bribery a state method almost more important than warfare.
Charles II of England was in his pay, and so were most of the Polish nobility,
presently to be described. His money, or rather the money of the tax-paying
classes in France, went everywhere. But his prevailing occupation was splendor.
His great palace at Versailles, with its salons, its corridors, its mirrors, its
terraces and fountains and parks and prospects, was the envy and admiration of
the world. He provoked a universal imitation. Every king and princelet in Europe
was building his own Versailles as much beyond his means as his subjects and
credits would permit. Everywhere the nobility rebuilt or extended their chateaux
to the new pattern. A great industry of beautiful and elaborate fabrics and
furnishings developed. The luxurious arts flourished everywhere; sculpture in
alabaster, faience, gilt woodwork, metal work, stamped leather, much music,
magnificent painting, beautiful printing and bindings, fine cookery, fine
vintages. Amidst the mirrors and fine furniture went a strange race of
«gentlemen» in vast powdered wigs, silks and laces, poised upon high red heels,
supported by amazing canes; and still more wonderful «ladies,» under towers of
Powdered hair and wearing vast expansions of silk and satin sustained on wire.
Through it all postured the great Louis, the sun of his world, unaware of the
meager and sulky and bitter faces that watched him from those lower darknesses
to which his sunshine did not penetrate. 

.. _Figure 790:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0790.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0790.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 790

    Figure 790: Map — Europe in 1714

We cannot give here at any length the story of the wars and doings of this
monarch. In many ways Voltaire’s *Siècle de* ouis XIV is still the best
and most wholesome account. He created a French navy fit to face the English and
Dutch, a very considerable achievement. But because his intelligence did not
rise above the lure of that Fata Morgana, that crack in the political wits of
Europe, the dream of a world-wide Holy Roman Empire, he drifted in his later
years to the propitiation of the Papacy, which had hitherto been hostile to him.
He set himself against those spirits of independence and disunion, the
Protestant princes, and he made war against Protestantism in France. Great
numbers of his most sober and valuable subjects were driven abroad by his
religious persecutions, taking arts and industries with them. The English silk
manufacture, for instance, was founded by French Protestants. Under his rule
were carried out the «dragonnades,» a peculiarly malignant and effectual form of
persecution. Rough soldiers were quartered in the houses of the Protestants, and
were free to disorder the life of their hosts and insult their womankind as they
thought fit. Men yielded to that sort of pressure who would not have yielded to
rack and fire. The education of the next generation of Protestants was broken
up, and the parents had to give Catholic instruction or none. They gave it, no
doubt, with a sneer and an intonation that destroyed all faith in it. While more
tolerant countries became mainly sincerely Catholic or sincerely Protestant, the
persecuting countries, like France and Spain and Italy, so destroyed honest
Protestant teaching that these peoples became mainly Catholic believers or
Catholic atheists, ready to break out into blank atheism when ever the
opportunity offered. The next reign, that of Louis XV, was the age of that
supreme mocker, Voltaire (1694-1778), an age in which everybody in French
society conformed to the Roman church and hardly anyone believed in it. 

It was part—and an excellent part—of the pose of Grand Monarchy to patronize
literature and the sciences. Louis XIV set up an academy of sciences in rivalry
with the English Royal Society of Charles II and the similar association at
Florence. He decorated his court with poets, playwrights, philosophers, and
scientific men. If the scientific process got little inspiration from this
patronage, it did at any rate acquire resources for experiment and publication,
and a certain prestige in the eyes of the vulgar. 

Louis XV was the great-grandson of Louis XIV, and an incompetent imitator of
his predecessor’s magnificence. He posed as a king, but his ruling passion was
that common obsession of our kind the pursuit of women, tempered by a
superstitious fear of hell. How such women as the Duchess of Chateauroux, Madame
de Pompadour, and Madame du Barry dominated the pleasures of the king, and how
wars and alliances were made, provinces devastated, thousands of people killed,
because of the vanities and spites of these creatures, and how all the public
life of France and Europe was tainted with intrigue And prostitution and
imposture because of them, the reader must learn from the memoirs of the time.
The spirited foreign policy went on steadily under Louis XV towards its final
smash. 

In 1774 this, Louis, Louis the Well-Beloved, as his flatterers, called him,
died of smallpox, and was succeeded by his grandson, Louis XVI (1774-93), a
dull, well-meaning man, an excellent shot, and an amateur locksmith of some
ingenuity. Of how he came to follow Charles I to the scaffold we shall tell in a
later section. Our present concern is with Grand Monarchy in the days of its
glory. 

Among the chief practitioners of Grand Monarchy outside France we may no to
first the Prussian kings, Frederick William I (1713-40), and his son and
successor, Frederick II, Frederick the Great (1740-86). The story of the slow
rise of the Hohenzollern family, which ruled the kingdom of Prussia, from
inconspicuous beginnings is too tedious and unimportant for us to follow here.
It is a story of luck and violence, of bold claims and sudden betrayals. It is
told with great appreciation in Carlyle’s *Frederick the Great.* y the
eighteenth century the Prussian kingdom was important enough to threaten the
empire; it had a strong, well-drilled army, and its king was an attentive and
worthy student of Machiavelli. Frederick the Great perfected his Versailles at
Potsdam. There the park of Sans Souci, with its fountains, avenues, statuary,
aped its model; there also was the New Palace, a vast brick building erected at
enormous expense, the Orangery in the Italian style, with a collection of
pictures, a Marble Palace, and so on. Frederick carried culture to the pitch of
authorship, and corresponded with and entertained Voltaire, to their mutual
exasperation. 

The Austrian dominions were kept too busy between the hammer of the French
and the anvil of the Turks to develop the real Grand Monarch style until the
reign of Maria Theresa (who, being a woman, did not bear the title of Empress)
(1740-80). Joseph II, who was Emperor from 1765-92, succeeded to her palaces in
1780. 

With Peter the Great (1682-1725) the empire of Muscovy broke away from her
Tartar traditions and entered the sphere of French attraction. Peter shaved the
Oriental beards of his nobles and introduced Western costume. These were but the
outward and visible symbols of his westerning tendencies. To release himself
from the Asiatic feeling and traditions of Moscow, which, like Pekin, has a
sacred inner city, the Kremlin, he built himself a new capital, Petrograd, upon
the swamp of the Neva. And of course be built his Versailles, the Peterhof,
about eighteen miles from this new Paris, employing a French architect and
having a terrace, fountains, cascades, picture gallery, park, and all the
recognized features. His more distinguished successors were Elizabeth (1741-62
) and Catherine the Great, a German princess, who, after obtaining the
crown in sound Oriental fashion through the murder of her husband, the
legitimate Tsar, reverted to advanced Western ideals and ruled with great vigour
from 1762 to 1796. She set up an academy, and corresponded with
Voltaire. And she lived to witness the end of the system of Grand Monarchy in
Europe and the execution of Louis XVI. 

We cannot even catalogue here the minor Grand Monarchs of the time in
Florence (Tuscany) and Savoy and Saxony and Denmark and Sweden. Versailles,
under a score of names, is starred in every volume of Bædeker, and the tourist
gapes in their palaces. Nor can we deal with the war of the Spanish Succession.
Spain, overstrained by the imperial enterprises of Charles V and Philip II, and
enfeebled by a bigoted persecution of Protestants, Moslems, and Jews, was
throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries sinking down from her
temporary importance in European affairs to the level of a secondary power
again. 

These European monarchs ruled their kingdoms as their noblemen ruled their
estates: they plotted against one another, they were politic and far seeing in
an unreal fashion, they made wars, they spent the substance of Europe upon
absurd «policies» of aggression and resistance. At last there burst upon them a
great storm out of the depths. That storm, the First French Revolution, the
indignation of the common man in Europe, took their system unawares. It was but
the opening outbreak of a great cycle of political and social storms that still
continue, that will perhaps continue until every vestige of nationalist monarchy
has been swept out of the world and the skies clear again for the great peace of
the federation of mankind. 

