
35.6 The Growth of the Idea of Great Powers
========================================================================
We have seen how the idea of a world-rule and a community of mankind first
came into human affairs, and we have traced how the failure of the Christian
churches to sustain and establish those conceptions of its founder, led to a
moral collapse in political affairs and a reversion to egotism and want of
faith. We have seen how Machiavellian monarchy set itself up against the spirit
of brotherhood in Christendom, and how Machiavellian monarchy developed
throughout a large part of Europe into the Grand Monarchies and Parliamentary
Monarchies of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. But the mind and
imagination of man is incessantly active, and beneath the sway of the grand
monarchs, a complex of notions and traditions was being woven as a net is woven,
to catch and entangle men's minds, the conception of international politics not
as a matter of dealings between princes, but as a matter of dealings between a
kind of immortal Beings, the Powers. The Princes came and went; a Louis XIV
would be followed by a petticoat hunting Louis XV, and he again by that
dull-witted amateur locksmith, Louis XVI. Peter the Great gave place to a
succession of empresses; the chief continuity of the Habsburgs after Charles V,
either in Austria or Spain, was a continuity of thick lips, clumsy chins, and
superstition; the amiable scounmented, modified, or corrected by positive
teaching, by literature, discussion, and properly criticized experience. The
real life of the ordinary man is his everyday life, his little circle of
affections, fears, hungers, lusts, and imaginative impulses. It is only when his
attention is directed to political affairs as something vitally affecting this
personal circle that he brings his reluctant mind to bear upon them. It is
scarcely too much to say that the ordinary man thinks as little about political
matters as he can, and Stops thinking about them as soon as possible. It is
still only very curious and exceptional minds, or minds that have by example or
good education acquired the scientific habit of wanting to know why, or minds
shocked and distressed by some public catastrophe and roused to wide
apprehensions of danger, that will not accept governments and institutions,
however preposterous, that do not directly annoy them, as satisfactory. The
ordinary human being, until he is so aroused, will acquiesce in any collective
activities that are going on in this world in which he finds himself, and any
phrasing or symbolization that meets his vague need for something greater to
which his personal affairs, his individual circle, can be anchored.

If we keep these manifest limitations of our nature in mind, it no longer
becomes a mystery how, as the idea of Christianity as a world brotherhood of men
sank into discredit because of its fatal entanglement with priest craft and the
Papacy on the one hand and with the authority of princes on the other, and the
age of faith passed into our present age of doubt and disbelief, men shifted the
reference of their lives from the kingdom of God and the brotherhood of mankind
to these apparently more living realities, France and England, Holy Russia,
Spain, Prussia, which were at least embodied in active courts, which maintained
laws, exerted power through armies and navies, waved flags with a compelling
solemnity, and were self-assertive and insatiably greedy in an entirely human
and understandable fashion. Certainly such men as Cardinal Richelieu and
Cardinal Mazarin thought of themselves as serving greater ends than their own or
their monarch's; they served the quasi-divine France of their imaginations. And
as certainly these habits of mind percolated down from them to their
subordinates and to the general body of the population. In the thirteenth and
fourteenth centuries the general population of Europe was no of blood, a certain
uniformity of type, and a homogeneity of interest, the European powers which
arose' in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries were entirely fictitious
unities. Russia was in truth an assembly of the most incongruous elements,
Cossacks, Tartars, Ukrainians, Muscovites, and, after the time of Peter,
Esthonians and Lithuanians; the France of Louis XV comprehended German Alsace
and freshly assimilated regions of Burgundy; it was a prison of suppressed
Huguenots and a sweating house for peasants. In «Britain», England carried on
her back the Hanoverian dominions in Germany, Scotland, the profoundly alien
Welsh and the hostile and Catholic Irish. Such powers as Sweden, Prussia, and
still more so Poland and Austria, if we watch them in a series of historical
maps, contract, expand, thrust out extensions, and wander over the map of Europe
as amoebae do under the microscope . . .

If we consider the psychology of international relationship as we see it
manifested in the world about us, and as it is shown by the development of the
«Power» idea in modern Europe, we shall realize certain historically very
important facts about the nature of man. Aristotle said that man is a political
animal, but in, our modern sense of the word politics, which now covers world
politics; he is nothing of the sort. He has still the instincts of the family
tribe, and beyond that he has a disposition to attach himself and his family to
something larger, to a tribe, a city a nation, or a state. But that disposition,
left to itself, is a vague and very uncritical disposition. If anything, he is
inclined to fear and dislike criticism of this something larger that encloses
his life and to which he has given himself, and to avoid such criticism. Perhaps
he has a subconscious fear of the isolation that may ensue if the system is
broken or discredited. He takes the milieu in which he finds himself for
granted; he accepts his city or his government, just as he accepts the nose or
the digestion which fortune has bestowed upon him. But men's loyalties, the
sides they take, in political things, are not innate, they are educational
results. For most men their education in these matters is the silent continuous
education of things about them. Men find themselves a part of Merry England or
Holy Russia; they grow up into these devotions; they accept them as a part of
their nature.

It is only slowly that the world is beginning to realize how profoundly the
tacit education of circumstances can be supplemented, modified, or corrected by
positive teaching, by literature, discussion, and properly criticized
experience. The real life of the ordinary man is his everyday life, his little
circle of affections, fears, hungers, lusts, and imaginative impulses. It is
only when his attention is directed to political affairs as something vitally
affecting this personal circle that he brings his reluctant mind to bear upon
them. It is scarcely too much to say that the ordinary man thinks as little
about political matters as he can, and stops thinking about them as soon as
possible. It is still only very curious and exceptional minds, or minds that
have by example or good education acquired the scientific habit of wanting to
know why, or minds shocked and distressed by some public catastrophe and roused
to wide apprehensions of danger, that will not accept governments and
institutions, however preposterous, that do not directly annoy them, as
satisfactory. The ordinary human being, until he is so aroused, will acquiesce
in any collective activities that are going on in this world in which he finds
himself, and any phrasing or symbolization that meets his vague need for
something greater to which his personal affairs, his individual circle, can be
anchored.

If we keep these manifest limitations of our nature in mind, it no longer
becomes a mystery how, as the idea of Christianity as a world brotherhood of men
sank into discredit because of its fatal entanglement with priestcraft and the
Papacy on the one hand and with the authority of princes on the other, and the
age of faith passed into our present age of doubt and disbelief, men shifted the
reference of their lives from the kingdom of God and the brotherhood of mankind
to these, apparently more living realities, France find England, Holy Russia,
Spain, Prussia, which were at least embodied in active courts, which maintained
laws, exerted power through armies and navies, waved flags with a compelling
solemnity, and were self-assertive and insatiably greedy in an entirely human
and understandable fashion. Certainly such men as Cardinal Richelieu and
Cardinal Mazarin thought of themselves as serving greater ends than their own or
their monarch's; they served the quasi-divine France of their imaginations. And
as, certainly those habits of mind percolated down from them to their
subordinates and to the general body of the population. In the thirteenth and
fourteenth centuries the general population of Europe was religious and only
vaguely patriotic; by the nineteenth it had become wholly patriotic. In a
crowded English or French or German railway carriage of the later nineteenth
century it would have aroused far less hostility to have jeered at God than to
have jeered at one of those strange beings, England or France or Germany. To
these things men's minds clung, and they clung to them because in all the world
there appeared nothing else so satisfying to cling to. They were the real and
living gods of Europe.

Of his idealization of governments and foreign offices, this mythology of
«Powers» and their loves and hates and conflicts, has so obsessed the
imaginations of Europe and Western Asia as to provide it with its «forms of
thought». Nearly all the histories, nearly all the political literature of the
last two centuries in Europe, have been written in its phraseology. Yet a time
is coming when a clear-sighted generation will read with perplexity how in the
community of western Europe, consisting everywhere of very slight variations of
a common racial mixture of Nordic and Iberian peoples and immigrant Semitic and
Mongolian elements, speaking nearly everywhere modifications of the same Aryan
Speech, intermarrying so freely that no one could tell with certainty the
«nationality» of any of his great-grandchildren, men could be moved to the
wildest excitement upon the question of the ascendancy of «France», the rise and
unification of «Germany», the rival claims of «Russia» and «Greece» to possess
Constantinople. These conflicts will seem then as reasonless and insane as those
dead, now incomprehensible feuds of the «greens» and «blues» that once filled
the streets of Byzantium with shouting and bloodshed.

Tremendously as these phantoms, the Powers, rule our minds and lives to-day,
they are, as this history shows clearly, things only of the last few centuries,
a mere hour, an incidental phase, in the vast deliberate history of our kind.
They mark a phase of relapse, a backwater, as the rise of Machiavellian monarchy
marks a backwater; they are part of the same eddy of faltering faith, in a
process altogether greater and altogether different in its general tendency, the
process of the moral and intellectual reunion of mankind. For a time men have
relapsed upon these national or imperial gods of theirs; it is but for a time.
The idea of the world state, the universal kingdom of righteousness of which
every living soul shall be a citizen, was already in the world two thousand
years ago never more to leave it. Men know that it is present even when they
refuse to recognize it. In the writings and talk of men about international
affairs today, in the current discussions of historians and political
journalists, there is an effect of drunken men growing sober, and terribly
afraid of growing sober. They still talk loudly of their «love» for France, of
their «hatred» of Germany, of the «traditional ascendancy of Britain at sea»,
and, so on and so on, like those who sing of their cups in spite of the
steadfast onset of sobriety and a headache. These are dead gods they serve. By
sea or land men want no Powers ascendant, but only law and service. That silent
unavoidable challenge is in all our minds like dawn breaking slowly, shining
between the shutters of a disordered room.

