
35.7 The Crowned Republic of Poland and its Fate
========================================================================

.. _Figure 800:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0800.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0800.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 800

    Figure 800: Partitions of Poland

The seventeenth century in Europe was the century of Louis XIV; he and French
ascendancy and Versailles are the central motif of the story. The eighteenth
century was equally the century of the «rise of Prussia as a great power», and
the chief figure in the story is Frederick 11, Frederick the Great. Interwoven
with his history is the story of Poland.

The condition of affairs in Poland was peculiar. Unlike its three neighbors,
Prussia, Russia, and the Austro-Hungarian monarchy of the Habsburgs, Poland had
not developed a Grand Monarchy. Its system of government may be best described
as republican with a king, an elected life-president. Each king was separately
elected. It was in fact rather more republican than Britain, but its
republicanism was more aristocratic in form. Poland had little trade and few
manufactures; she was agricultural and still with great areas of grazing,
forest, and waste; she was a poor country, and her landowners were poor
aristocrats. The mass of her population was a downtrodden and savagely ignorant
peasantry, and she also harbored great masses of very poor Jews. She had
remained Catholic. She was, so to speak, a poor Catholic inland Britain,
entirely surrounded by enemies instead of by the sea. She had no definite
boundaries at all, neither sea nor mountain. And it added to her misfortunes
that some of her elected kings had been brilliant and aggressive rulers.
Eastward her power extended weakly into regions inhabited almost entirely by
Russians; westward she overlapped a German subject population.

Because she had no great trade, she had no great towns to compare with those
of Western Europe, and no vigorous universities to hold her mind together. Her
noble class lived on their estates, without much intellectual intercourse. They
were patriotic, they had an aristocratic sense of freedom which was entirely
compatible with the systematic impoverishment of their serfs but their
patriotism and freedom were incapable of effective co-operation. While warfare
was a matter of levies of men and horses, Poland was a comparatively strong
power; but it was quite unable to keep pace with the development of military art
that was making standing forces of professional soldiers the necessary weapon in
warfare. Yet divided and disabled as she was, she could yet count some notable
victories to her credit. The last Turkish attack upon Vienna (1683) was defeated
by the Polish cavalry under King John Sobiesky, King John III. (This same
Sobiesky, before he was elected king, had been in the pay of Louis XIV, and had
also fought for the Swedes against his native country.) Needless to say, this
weak aristocratic republic, with its recurrent royal elections, invited
aggression from all three of its neighbors. «Foreign money», and every sort of
exterior interference, came into the, country, at each election. And like the
Greeks of old, every disgruntled Polish patriot flew off to some foreign enemy
to wreak his indignation upon his ungrateful country.

Even when the King of Poland was elected, he had very little power because of
the mutual jealousy of the nobles. Like the English peers, they preferred a
foreigner, and for much the same reason, because he had no roots of power in the
land; but unlike the, British, their own government had not the solidarity,
which the periodic assembling of Parliament in London, the «coming up to town»,
gave the British peers. In London there was a «Society», a continuous
intermingling of influential persons and ideas. Poland had no London and no
«Society», So practically Poland had no central government at all. The King of
Poland could not make war nor peace, levy a tax nor alter the law, without the
consent of the Diet, and *any single member of the Diet had the power of
putting a veto upon any proposal before it.* He had merely to rise and say,
«I disapprove», and the matter dropped. He could even carry his free veto, his
*liberum* veto, further. He could object to the assembly of the Diet, and
the Diet was thereby dissolved. Poland was not simply a crowned aristocratic
republic like the British; it was a paralyzed crowned aristocratic republic.

To Frederick the Great the existence of Poland was particularly provocative
because of the way in which an arm of Poland reached out to the Baltic at
Dantzig and separated his ancestral dominions in East Prussia from his
territories within the empire. It was he who incited Catherine the Second of
Russia and Maria Theresa of Austria, whose respect he had earned by depriving
her of Silesia, to a joint attack upon Poland.

Let four maps of Poland tell the tale.

After this first outrage of 1772 Poland underwent a great change if heart.
Poland was indeed born as a nation on the eve of her dissolution. There was a
hasty but very considerable development of education, literature, and art;
historians and poets sprang up, and the impossible constitution that had made
Poland impotent was swept aside. The free veto was abolished, the crown was made
hereditary to save Poland from the foreign intrigues that attended every
election, and a Parliament in imitation of the British was set up. There were,
however, lovers of the old order in Poland who resented these necessary changes,
and these obstructive were naturally supported by Prussia and Russia, who wanted
no Polish revival. Came the second partition, and, after a fierce patriotic
struggle that began in the region annexed by Prussia and found a leader and
national hero in Kosciusko, the final obliteration of Poland from the map. So
for a time ended this Parliamentary threat to Grand Monarchy in Eastern Europe.
But the patriotism of the Poles grew stronger and clearer with suppression. For
a hundred and twenty years Poland struggled like a submerged creature beneath
the political and military net that held her down. She rose again in 1918, at
the end of the Great War.

