
35.9 Britain Dominates India
========================================================================

.. _Figure 807:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0807.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0807.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 807

    Figure 807: Map â€” India

    The chief foreign settlements in India at the end of the 17th century.

It was not only in America that the French and British powers clashed. The
condition of India at this time was one very interesting and attractive to
European adventurers. The great Mongol Empire of Baber, Akbar, and Aurangzeb
were now far gone in decay. What had happened to India was very parallel to what
had happened to Germany. The Great Mogul at Delhi in India, like the Holy Roman
Emperor in Germany, was still legally overlord, but after the death of Aurangzeb
he exerted only a nominal authority except in the immediate neighbourhood of his
capital. In the south-west a Hindu people, the Mahrattas, had risen against
Islam, restored Brahminism as the ruling religion, and for a time extended their
power over the whole southern triangle of India. In Rajputana also the rule of
Islam was replaced by Brahminism, and at Bhurtpur and Jaipur there ruled
powerful Rajput princes. In Oudh there was a Shiite kingdom, with its capital at
Lucknow, and Bengal was also a separate (Moslem) kingdom. Away in the Punjab to
the north had arisen a very interesting religious body, the Sikhs, proclaiming
the universal rule of one God and assailing both the Hindu Vedas and the Moslem
Koran. Originally a pacific sect, the Sikhs presently followed the example of
Islam, and sought at first very disastrously to themselves to establish the
kingdom of God by the sword. And into this confused and disordered India there
presently (1738) came an invader from the north, Nadir Shah (1736-47), the
Turcoman ruler of Persia, who swept down through the Kyber pass, broke every
army that stood in his way, and captured and sacked Delhi, carrying off an
enormous booty. He left the north of India so utterly broken, that in the next
twenty years there were no less than six other successful plundering raids into
North India from Afghanistan, which had become an independent state at the death
of Nadir Shah. For a time Mahrattas fought with Afghans for the rule of North
India; then the Mahratta, power broke up into a series of principalities,
Indore, Gwalior, Baroda, and others . . .

This was the India into which the French and English were thrusting during
the eighteenth century. A succession of other European powers had been
struggling for a commercial and political footing in India and the east ever
since Vasco da Gama had made his memorable voyage round the Cape to Calicut. The
sea trade of India had previously been in the hands of the Red Sea Arabs, and
the Portuguese won it from them in a series of sea fights. The Portuguese ships
were the bigger, and carried a heavier armament. For a time the Portuguese held
the Indian trade as their own, and Lisbon outshone Venice as a mart for oriental
spices; the seventeenth century, however, saw the Dutch grasping at this
monopoly. At the crest of their power the Dutch had settlements at the Cape of
Good Hope, they hold Mauritius, they had two establishments in Persia, twelve in
India, six in Ceylon, and all over the East Indies they had dotted their
fortified stations. But their selfish resolution to exclude traders of any other
European nationality forced the Swedes, Danes, French, and English into hostile
competition. The first effectual blows at their overseas monopoly were struck in
European waters by the victories of Blake, the English republican admiral; and
by the opening of the eighteenth century both the, English and French were in
vigorous competition with the Dutch for trade and privileges throughout India.
At Madras, Bombay, and Calcutta the English established their headquarters;
Pondicherry and Chandernagore were the chief French settlements.

At first all these European powers came merely as traders and the only
establishments they attempted were warehouses; but the unsettled state of the
country, and the unscrupulous methods of their rivals, made it natural for them
to fortify and arm their settlements, and this armament made them attractive
allies of the various warring princes who now divided India, And it was entirely
in the spirit of the new European nationalists politics that when the French
took one side, the British should take another.

The great leader upon the English side was Robert Clive, who was born in
1725, and went to India in 1743. His chief antagonist was Dupleix. The story of
this struggle throughout the first half of the eighteenth century is too long
and intricate to be told here. By 1761 the British found themselves completely
dominant in the Indian peninsula. At Plassey (1757) and at Buxar (1764) their
armies gained striking and conclusive victories over the army of Bengal and the
army of Oudh. The Great Mogul, nominally their overlord, became in effect their
puppet. They levied taxes over great areas; they exacted indemnities for real or
fancied opposition.

These successes were not gained directly by the forces of the King of
England; they were gained by the East India Trading Company, which had been
originally at the time of its incorporation under Queen Elizabeth no more than a
company of sea adventurers. Step by step they had been forced to raise troops
and arm their ships. And now this trading company, with its tradition of gain,
found itself dealing not merely in spices and dyes and tea and jewels, but in
the revenues and territories of princes and the destinies of India. It had come
to buy and sell, and it found itself achieving a tremendous piracy. There was no
one to challenge its proceedings. Is it any wonder that its captains and
commanders and officials, nay, even its clerks and common soldiers, came back to
England loaded with spoils? Men under such circumstances, with a great and
wealthy land at their mercy, could not determine what they might or might not
do. It was a strange land to them, with a strange sunlight; its brown people
were a different race, outside their range of sympathy; its temples and
buildings seemed to sustain fantastic standards of behavior. English-men at home
were perplexed when presently these generals and officials came back to make
dark accusations against each other of extortions and cruelties. Upon Clive
Parliament passed a vote of censure. He committed suicide in 1774. In 1788
Warren Hastings, a second great Indian administrator, was impeached and
acquitted (1792). It was a strange and unprecedented situation in the world's
history. The English Parliament found itself ruling over a London trading
company, which in its turn was dominating an empire far greater and more
populous than all the domains of the British crown. To the bulk of the English
people India was a remote, fantastic, almost inaccessible land, to which
adventurous poor young men went out, to return after many years very rich and
very choleric old gentlemen. It was difficult for the English to conceive what
the life of these countless brown millions in the eastern sunshine could be.
Their imaginations declined the task. India remained romantically unreal. It was
impossible for the English, therefore, to exert any effective supervision and
control over the company's proceedings.

