29.1 Judea at the Christian Era
========================================================================

.. _Figure 495:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0495.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0495.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 495

    Figure 495: Galilee and surrounding provinces

Before we can understand the qualities of Christianity,
which must now play a large part in our history, and which opened men's eyes to
fresh aspects of the possibility of a unified world, we must go back some
centuries and tell of the condition of affairs in Palestine and Syria, in which
countries Christianity arose. We have already told the main facts about the
origin of the Jewish nation and tradition, about the Diaspora, about the
fundamentally scattered nature of Jewry even from the beginning, and the
gradual development of the idea of one just God ruling the earth and bound by a
special promise to preserve and bring to honour the Jewish people. The Jewish
idea was and is a curious combination of theological breadth and an intense
racial patriotism. The Jews looked for a special saviour, a Messiah, who was to
redeem mankind by the agreeable process of restoring the fabulous glories of
David and Solomon, and bringing the whole world at last under the benevolent
but firm Jewish heel. As the political power of the Semitic peoples declined,
as Carthage followed Tyre into the darkness and Spain became a Roman province,
this dream grew and spread. There can be little doubt that the scattered
Phoenicians in Spain and Africa and throughout the Mediterranean, speaking as
they did a language closely akin to Hebrew and being deprived of their
authentic political rights, became proselytes to Judaism. For phases of
vigorous proselytism alternated with phases of exclusive jealousy in Jewish
history. On one occasion the Idumeans, being conquered, were all forcibly made
Jews.\ [#fn1]_  There were Arab tribes who were Jews in the time of Muhammad, and a
Turkish people who were mainly Jews in South Russia in the ninth century.
Judaism is indeed the reconstructed political ideal of many shattered peoples, mainly
Semitic. It is to the Phoenician contingent and to Aramean accessions in
Babylon that the financial and commercial tradition of the Jews is to be
ascribed. But as a result of these coalescences and assimilations, almost
everywhere in the towns throughout the Roman Empire, and far beyond it in the
east, Jewish communities traded and flourished, and were kept in touch through
the Bible, and through a religious and educational organization. The main part
of Jewry never was in Judea and had never come out of Judea.

Manifestly this intercommunicating series of Judaized
communities had very great financial and political facilities. They could
assemble resources, they could stir up, they could allay. They were neither so
abundant nor so civilized as the still more widely diffused Greeks, but they
had a tradition of greater solidarity. Greek was hostile to Greek; Jew stood by
Jew. Wherever a Jew went, he found men of like mind and like tradition with
himself. He could get shelter, food, loans, and legal help. And by reason of
this solidarity rulers had everywhere to take account of this people as a help,
as a source, of loans, or as a source of trouble. So it is that the Jews have
persisted as a people while Hellenism has become a universal light for mankind.

We cannot tell here in any detail the history of that
smaller part of Jewry that lived in Judea. These Jews had returned to their old
position of danger; again they were seeking peace in, so to speak, the middle
of a highway. In the old time they had been between Syria and Assyria to the
north and Egypt to the south; now they had the Seleucids, to the north and the Ptolemies
to the south, and when the Seleucids went, then down came the Roman power upon
them. The independence of Judea was always a qualified and precarious thing.
The reader must go to the *Antiquities*
and the *Wars of* 
*the Jews of* Flavius Josephus, a copious, tedious, and maddeningly
patriotic writer, to learn of the succession of their rulers, of their
high-priest monarchs, and of the Maccabaeans, the Herods and the like. These
rulers were for the most part of the ordinary eastern type, cunning,
treacherous, and blood-stained. Thrice Jerusalem was taken and twice the temple
was destroyed. It as the support of the far more powerful Diaspora that
prevented the little country from being wiped out altogether, until 70 A.D.,
when Titus the adopted son and successor of the Emperor Vespasian, after a
siege that ranks in bitterness and horror with that of Tyre and Carthage, took
Jerusalem and destroyed city and temple altogether. He did this in an attempt
to destroy Jewry, but indeed be made Jewry stronger by destroying its one
sensitive and vulnerable point.

Throughout a history of five centuries of war and civil
commotion between the return from captivity and the destruction of Jerusalem,
certain constant features of the Jew persisted. He remained obstinately
monotheistic; he would have none other gods but the one true God. In Rome, as
in Jerusalem, he stood out manfully against the worship of any god-Caesar. And
to the best of his ability he held to his covenants with his God. No graven
images could enter Jerusalem; even the Roman standards with their eagles had to
stay outside.

Two divergent lines of thought are traceable in Jewish
affairs during these five hundred years. On the right, so to speak, are the
high and narrow Jews, the Pharisees, very orthodox, very punctilious upon even
the minutest details of the law, intensely patriotic and exclusive. Jerusalem
on one occasion fell to the Seleucid monarch Antiochus IV because the Jews
would not defend it on the Sabbath day, when it is forbidden to work; and it
was because the Jews made no effort to destroy his siege train on the Sabbath
that Pompey the Great was able to take Jerusalem. But against these narrow Jews
were, pitted, the broad Jews, the Jews of the left, who were Hellenizers, among
whom are to be ranked the Sadducees, who did not believe in immortality. These
latter Jews, the broad Jews, were all more or less disposed to mingle with and
assimilate themselves to the Greeks and Hellenized peoples about them. They
were ready to accept proselytes, and so to share God and his promise with all
mankind. But what they gained in generosity they lost in rectitude. They were
the worldlings of Judea. We have already noted how the Hellenized Jews of Egypt
lost their Hebrew, and had to have their Bible translated into Greek.

In the reign of Tiberius Caesar a great teacher arose out
of Judea who was to liberate the intense realization of the righteousness and
unchallengeable oneness of God, and of man's moral obligation to God, which was
the strength of orthodox Judaism, from that greedy and exclusive narrowness
with which it was so extraordinarily intermingled in the Jewish mind. This was
Jesus of Nazareth, the seed rather than the founder of Christianity.

.. [#fn1] Josephus.

