
29.10 The Salvation of Learning by Christianity
========================================================================
A very important share in the social recrystallization that
went on in the sixth and seventh centuries after the breakdown and fusion of
the fourth and fifth was taken by the Christian monastic orders that were now
arising in the Western world. Monasteries had existed in the world before
Christianity. During the period of social unhappiness among the Jews before the
time of Jesus of Nazareth, there was a sect of Essenes who lived apart in
communities vowed to austere lives of solitude, purity, and self-denial.
Buddhism, too, had developed its communities of men who withdrew from the
general effort and commerce of the world to lead lives of austerity and
contemplation. Indeed, the story of Buddha as we have told it, shows that such
ideas must have prevailed in India long before his time, and that at last he
repudiated them. Quite early in the history of Christianity there arose a
similar movement away from the competition and heat and stress of the daily
life of men. In Egypt, particularly, great numbers of men and women went out
into the desert and there lived solitary lives of prayer and contemplation,
living in absolute poverty in eaves or under rocks, and subsisting on the
chance alms of those whom their holiness impressed. Such lives would signify
little to the historian, they are indeed of their very nature lives withdrawn
from history, were it not for the turn this monastic tendency presently took
among the more energetic and practical Europeans.

One of the central figures in the story of the development
of monasticism in Europe is St. Benedict, who lived between 480 and 544. He was
born at Spoleto in Italy, and he was a young man of good family and ability.
The shadow of the times fell upon him, and, like Buddha, he took to the
religious life and at first set no limit to his austerities. Fifty miles from
Rome is Subiaco, and there at the end of a gorge of the Anio, beneath a jungle
growth of weeds and bushes, rose a deserted palace built by the Emperor Nero,
overlooking an artificial lake that had been made in those days of departed
prosperity by damming back the waters of the river. Here with a hair shirt as
his chief possession, Benedict took up his quarters in a cave in the high
southward-looking cliff that overhangs the stream, in so inaccessible a
position that his food had to be lowered to him on a cord by a faithful
admirer. Three years he lived here, and his fame spread as Buddha's did nearly
a thousand years before under similar circumstances.

As in the case of Buddha, the story of Benedict has been
overlaid by foolish and credulous disciples with a mass of silly stories of
miracles and manifestations. But presently we find him, no longer engaged in
self-torment, but controlling a group of twelve monasteries, and the resort of
a great number of people. Youths are brought to him to be educated, and the
whole character of his life has changed.

From Subiaco he moved further southward to Monte Cassino,
half-way between Rome and Naples, a lonely and beautiful mountain, in the midst
of a great circle of majestic heights. Here, it is interesting to note that in
the sixth century A.D. he found a temple of Apollo and a sacred grove and the
countryside still worshipping at this shrine. His first labours had to be
missionary labours, and it was with difficulty that he persuaded the simple
pagans to demolish their temple and cut down their grove. The establishment
upon Monte Cassino became a famous and powerful centre within the lifetime of
its founder. Mixed up with the imbecile inventions of marvel-loving monks about
demons exorcised, disciples walking on the water, and dead children restored to
life, we can still detect something of the real spirit of Benedict.
Particularly significant are the stories that represent him as discouraging
extreme mortification. He sent a damping message to a solitary who had invented
a new degree in saintliness by chaining himself to a rock in a narrow cave.
«Break thy chain», said Benedict, «for the true servant of God is chained not
to rocks by iron, but to, righteousness by Christ».

And next to the discouragement of solitary self-torture it
is Benedict's distinction that he insisted upon hard work. Through the legends
shines the clear indication of the trouble made by his patrician students and
disciples who found themselves obliged to toil instead of leading lives of leisurely
austerity under the ministrations of the lower class brethren. A third
remarkable thing about Benedict was his political influence. He set himself to
reconcile Goths and Italians, and it is clear that Totila, his Gothic king,
came to him for counsel and was greatly influenced by him. When Totila retook
Naples from the Greeks, the Goths protected the women from insult and treated
even the captured soldiers with humanity. When Belisarius, Justinian's general,
had taken the same place ten years previously, he had celebrated his triumph by
a general massacre.

Now the monastic organization of Benedict was a very great
beginning in the western world. One of his prominent followers was Pope Gregory
the Great (540-604), the first monk to become pope (590); he was one of the
most capable and energetic of the popes, sending successful missions to the
unconverted, and particularly to the Anglo-Saxons. He ruled in Rome like an
independent king, organizing armies, making treaties. To his influence is due
the imposition of the Benedictine rule upon nearly the whole of Latin
monasticism.

Closely associated with these two names in the development
of a civilizing monasticism out of the merely egotistic mortifications of the
early recluses is that of Cassiodorus (490-585). He was evidently much senior
to Pope Gregory, and younger by ten years than Benedict, and, like these two,
he belonged to a patrician family, a Syrian family settled in Italy. He had a
considerable official career under the Gothic kings; and when, between 545 and
553, the overthrow of those kings and the great pestilence paved the way for
the new barbaric rule of the Lombards, he took refuge in a monastic career. He
founded a monastery upon his private estates, and set the monks he gathered to
work in quite the Benedictine fashion, though whether his monks actually
followed the Benedictine rule that was being formulated about the same time
from Monte Cassino we do not know. But there can be no question of his
influence upon the development of this great working, teaching, and studying
order. It is evident that he was profoundly impressed by the universal decay of
education and the possible loss of all learning and of the ancient literature
by the world; and from the first he directed his brethren to the task of
preserving and restoring these things. He collected ancient MSS. and caused
them to be copied. He made sundials, water clocks, and similar apparatus, a
little last gleam of experimental science in the gathering darkness. He wrote a
history of the Gothic kings, and, what is more significant of his sense of the
needs of the time, he produced a series of school books on the liberal arts and
a grammar. Probably his influence was even greater than that of St. Benedict in
making monasticism into a powerful instrument for the restoration of social
order in the Western world.

The spread of monasteries of the Benedictine order or type
in the seventh and eighth centuries was very considerable. Everywhere we find
them as centres of light, restoring, maintaining, and raising the standard of
cultivation, preserving some sort of elementary education, spreading useful
arts, multiplying and storing books, and keeping before the eyes of the world
the spectacle and example of a social backbone. For eight centuries thenceforth
the European monastic system remained a system of patches and fibres of
enlightenment in what might otherwise have been a wholly chaotic world. Closely
associated with the Benedictine monasteries were the schools that grew
presently into the mediaeval universities. The schools of the Roman world had
been altogether swept away in the general social breakdown. There was a time
when very few priests in Britain or Gaul could read the gospel or their service
books. Only gradually was teaching restored to the world. But when it was
restored, it came back not as the duty work of a learned slave, but as the
religious service of a special class of devoted men.

In the east also there was a breach of educational
continuity, but there the cause was not so much social disorder as religious
intolerance, and the break was by no means so complete. Justinian closed and
dispersed the schools of Athens (529), but he did this very largely in order to
destroy a rival to the new school he was setting up in Constantinople, which
was more directly under imperial control. Since the new Latin learning of the
developing western universities had no text-books and literature of its own, it
had, in spite of its strong theological bias to the contrary, to depend very
largely upon the Latin classics and the Latin translations of the Greek
literature. It was obliged to preserve far more of that splendid literature
than it had a mind to do.
