
29.5 Doctrines Added to the Teachings of Jesus
========================================================================
The story of the early beginnings of Christianity is the
story of the struggle between the real teachings and spirit of Jesus of
Nazareth and the limitations, amplifications, and misunderstandings of the very
inferior men who had loved and followed him from Galilee, and who were now the
bearers and custodians of his message to mankind. The gospels and the Acts of
the Apostles present a patched and uneven record, but there can be little
question that on the whole it is a quite honest record of those early days.

The early Nazarenes, as the followers of Jesus were called,
present from the first a spectacle of a great confusion between these two
strands, his teaching on the one hand, and the glosses and interpretations of
the disciples on the other. They continued for a time his disciplines of the
complete subjugation of self; they had their goods in common, they had no bond
but love. Nevertheless, they built their faith upon the stories that were told
of his resurrection and magical ascension, and the promised return. Few of them
understood that the renunciation of self is its own reward, that it is itself
the Kingdom of Heaven; they regarded it as a sacrifice that entitled them to
the compensation of power and dominion when presently the second coming
occurred. They had now all identified Jesus with the promised Christ, the
Messiah so long expected by the Jewish people. They found out prophecies of the
crucifixion in the prophets. The Gospel of Matthew is particularly insistent
upon these prophecies. Revived by these hopes, enforced by the sweet and pure
lives of many of the believers, the Nazarene doctrine began to spread very
rapidly in Judea and Syria.

And presently there arose a second great teacher, whom many
modern authorities regard as the real founder of Christianity, Saul of Tarsus,
or Paul. Saul apparently was his Jewish and Paul his Roman name; he was a Roman
citizen, and a man of much wider education and a much narrower intellectuality
than Jesus seems to have been. By birth he, was probably a Jew, though some
Jewish writers deny this; he had certainly studied under Jewish teachers. But
he was well versed in the Hellenic theologies of Alexandria, and his language
was Greek. Some classical scholars profess to find his Greek unsatisfactory; be
did not use the Greek of Athens, but the Greek of Alexandria; but he used it
with power and freedom.\ [#fn9]_  He was a religious theorist and teacher long before
he heard of Jesus of Nazareth, and he appears in the New Testament narrative at
first as the bitter critic and antagonist of the Nazarenes.

The present writer has been unable to find any discussion
of the religious ideas of Paul before he became a follower of Jesus. They must
have been a basis, if only a basis of departure, for his new views, and their
phraseology certainly supplied the colour of his new doctrines. We are almost
equally in the dark as to the teachings of Gamaliel, who is named as the Jewish
teacher at whose feet he sat. Nor do we know what Gentile teachings had reached
him. It is highly probable that he had been influenced by Mithraism. He uses
phrases curiously like Mithraistic phrases. What will be clear to anyone who
reads his various Epistles, side by side with the Gospels, is that his mind was
saturated by an idea which does not appear at all prominently in the reported
sayings and teachings of Jesus, the idea of a sacrificial person, who is
offered up to God as an atonement for sin. What Jesus preached was a new birth
of the human soul; what Paul preached was the ancient religion of priest and
altar and propitiatory bloodshed. Jesus was to him the Easter lamb, that
traditional human victim without spot or blemish who haunts all the religions
of the dark white peoples. Paul came to the Nazarenes with overwhelming force
because he came to them with this completely satisfactory explanation of the
disaster of the crucifixion. It was a brilliant elucidation of what had been
utterly perplexing.

Paul had never seen Jesus. His knowledge of Jesus and his
teaching must have been derived from the hearsay of the original disciples. It
is clear that he apprehended much of the spirit of Jesus and his doctrine of a
new birth, but he built this into a theological system, a very subtle and
ingenious system, whose appeal to this day is chiefly intellectual. And it is
clear that the faith of the Nazarenes, which he found as a doctrine of motive
and a way of living, he made into a doctrine of 
*belief.* He found the Nazarenes with a spirit and hope, and he left
them Christians with the beginning of a creed.

But we must refer the reader to the Acts of the Apostles
and the Pauline Epistles for an account of Paul's mission and teaching. He was
a man of enormous energy, and he taught at Jerusalem, Antioch, Athens, Corinth,
Ephesus, and Rome.

Possibly he went into Spain. The manner of his death is not
certainly known, but it is said that he was killed in Rome during the reign of
Nero. A great fire had burnt a large part of Rome, and the new sect was accused
of causing this. The rapid spread of Christian teaching certainly owes more to
Paul than to any other single man. Within two decades of the crucifixion this
new religion was already attracting the attention of the Roman rulers in
several provinces. If it had acquired a theology in the hands of St. Paul, it
still retained much of the revolutionary and elementary quality of the
teachings of Jesus. It had become somewhat more tolerant of private property;
it would accept wealthy adherents without insisting upon the communization of
their riches, and St. Paul has condoned the institution of slavery («Slaves, be
obedient to your masters»), but it still set its face like flint against
certain fundamental institutions of the Roman world. It would not tolerate the
godhead of Caesar; not even by a mute gesture at the altar would the Christians
consent to worship the Emperor, though their lives were at stake in the matter.
It denounced the gladiatorial shows. Unarmed, but possessing enormous powers of
passive resistance, Christianity thus appeared at the outset plainly as
rebellion, striking at the political if not at the economic essentials of the
imperial system. The first evidences of Christianity in non-Christian
literature we find when perplexed Roman officials began to write to one another
and exchange views upon the strange problem presented by this infectious
rebellion of otherwise harmless people.

Much of the history of the Christians in the first two
centuries Christian era is very obscure. They spread far and wide throughout
the world, but we know very little of their ideas or their ceremonies and
methods during that time. As yet they had no settled creeds, and there can be
little doubt that there were wide local variations in their beliefs and disciplines
during this formless period. But whatever their local differences, everywhere
they seem to have carried much of the spirit of Jesus; and though everywhere,
they aroused bitter enmity and active counter-propaganda, the very charges made
against them witness to the general goodness of their lives.

During this indefinite time a considerable amount of a sort
of theocrasia seems to have gone on between the Christian cult and the almost
equally popular and widely diffused Mithraic cult, and the cult of Serapis-Isis-Horus.
From the former it would seem the Christians adopted Sun-day as their chief day
of worship instead of the Jewish Sabbath, the abundant use of candles in
religious ceremonies, the legend of the adoration by the shepherds, and
probably also those ideas and phrases, so distinctive of certain sects to this
day, about being «washed in the blood» of Christ, and of Christ being a blood
sacrifice. For we have to remember that a death by crucifixion is hardly a more
bloody death than hanging; to speak of Jesus shedding his blood for mankind is
really a most inaccurate expression. Even when we remember that he was
scourged, that he wore a crown of thorns, and that his side was pierced by a
spear, we are still far from a «fountain filled with blood». But Mithraism,
centred upon some now forgotten mysteries about Mithras sacrificing a sacred
and benevolent bull; all the Mithraic shrines seem to have contained a figure
of Mithras killing this bull, which bleeds copiously from a wound in its side,
and from this blood a new life sprang. The Mithraist votary actually bathed in
the blood of the sacrificial bull, and was «born again» thereby. At his
initiation he went beneath a scaffolding on which the bull was killed, and the
blood ran down on him.

The contributions of the Alexandrine cult to Christian
thought and practices were even more considerable. In the personality of Horus,
who was at once the son of Serapis and identical with Serapis, it was natural
for the Christians to find an illuminating analogue in their struggles with the
Pauline mysteries. From that to the identification of Mary with Isis, and her
elevation to a rank quasi-divine–in spite of the saying of Jesus about his
mother and his brothers that we have already quoted–was also a very natural
step. Natural, too, was it for Christianity to adopt, almost insensibly, the
practical methods of the popular religions of the time. Its priests took on the
head-shaving and the characteristic garments of the Egyptian priests, because
that sort of thing seemed to be the right way of distinguishing a priest. One
accretion followed another. Almost insensibly the originally revolutionary
teaching was buried under these customary acquisitions. We have already, tried
to imagine Gautama Buddha returning to Tibet, and his amazement at the worship
of his own image in Lhassa. We will but suggest the parallel amazement of some
earnest Nazarene who had known and followed his dusty and travel-worn Master
through the dry sunlight of Galilee, restored suddenly to this world and
visiting, let us say, a mass in St. Peter's at Rome, at learning that the
consecrated wafer upon the altar was none other than his crucified teacher.

Religion in a world community is not many things but one
thing, and it was inevitable that all the living religious faiths in the world
at the time, and all the philosophy and religious thought that came into
contact with Christianity, should come to an account with Christianity and
exchange phrases and ideas. The hopes of the early Nazarenes had identified
Jesus with the Christ; the brilliant mind of Paul had surrounded his career
with mystical significance. Jesus had called men and women to a giant
undertaking, to the renunciation of self, to the new birth into the kingdom of
love. The line of least resistance for the flagging convert was to
intellectualize himself away from this plain doctrine, this stark proposition,
into complicated theories and ceremonies that would leave his essential self
alone. How much easier is it to sprinkle oneself with blood than to purge
oneself from malice and competition; to eat bread and drink wine and pretend
one had absorbed divinity, to give candles rather than the heart, to shave the
head and retain the scheming privacy of the brain inside it! The world was full
of such evasive philosophy and theological stuff in the opening centuries of
the Christian era. It is not for us here to enlarge upon the distinctive
features of Neoplatonism, Gnosticism, Philonism, and the like teachings which
abounded in the Alexandrian world. But it was all one world with that in which
the early Christians were living. The writings of such men as Origen, Plotinus,
and Augustine witness to the inevitable give and take of the time.

Jesus called himself the Son of God and also the Son of
Man; but he laid little stress on who he was or what he was, and much upon the
teachings of the Kingdom. In declaring that he was more than a man and divine,
Paul and his other followers, whether they were right or wrong, opened up a
vast field of argument. Was Jesus God? Or had God created him? Was he identical
with God or separate from God? It is not the function of the historian to
answer such questions, but he is bound to note them, and to note how
unavoidable they were, because of the immense influence they have had upon the
whole subsequent life of western mankind. By the fourth century of the
Christian Era we find all the Christian communities so agitated and exasperated
by tortuous and elusive arguments about the nature of God as to be largely
negligent of the simpler teachings of charity, service, and brotherhood that
Jesus had inculcated.

The chief views that the historian notices are those of the
Arians, the Sabellians, and the Trinitarians. The Arians who taught that Christ
was less than God; the Sabellians taught that he was a mode or aspect of God;
God was Creator, Saviour, and Comforter just as one man may be father, trustee,
and guest; the Trinitarians, of who Athanasius was the great leader, taught
that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost were but one God. The reader is
referred to the Athanasian Creed\ [#fn10]_  for the exact expression of the latter
mystery, and for the alarming consequences to him of any failure to grasp and
believe it. To Gibbon he must go for a derisive statement of these controversies.
The present writer can deal with them neither with awe nor derision; they seem
to him, he must confess, a disastrous ebullition of the human mind entirely
inconsistent with the plain account of Jesus preserved for us in the gospels.
Orthodoxy became a test not only for Christian office, but for Christian trade
and help. A small point of doctrine might mean affluence<br>
or beggary to a man. It is difficult to read the surviving literature of the
time without a strong sense of the dogmatism, the spites rivalries, and
pedantries of the men, who tore Christianity to pieces for the sake of these
theological for the sake of these of theological refinements. Most of the
Trinitarian disputants for it is chiefly Trinitarian documents that survive
accuse their antagonists, probably with truth, of mean and secondary motives,
but they do so in a manner that betrays their own base spirit very clearly.
Arius, for example, is accused of adopting heretical opinions because he was
not appointed Bishop of Alexandria. Riots and excommunicating and banishments
punctuated these controversies, and finally came official persecutions. These
fine differences about the constitution of the Deity interwove with politics
and international disputes. Men who quarrelled over business affairs, wives who
wished to annoy their husbands, developed antagonistic views upon this exalted
theme. Most of the barbarian invaders of the empire were Arians; probably
because their simple minds found the Trinitarian position incomprehensible.

It is easy for the sceptic to mock at these disputes. But
even if we think that these attempts to say exactly how God was related to
himself were presumptuous and intellectually monstrous, nevertheless we are
bound to recognize that beneath these preposterous refinements of impossible
dogmas there lay often a real passion for truth–even if it was truth ill
conceived. Both sides produced genuine martyrs. And the zeal of these
controversies, though it is a base and often malicious zeal, did at any rate
make the Christian sects very energetically propagandist and educational.
Moreover, because the history of the Christian body in the fourth and fifth
centuries is largely a record of these unhappy disputes, that must not blind us
to the fact that the spirit of Jesus did live and ennoble many lives among the
Christians. The text of the gospels, though it was probably tampered with
during this period, was not destroyed, and Jesus of Nazareth, in his own
manifest inimitable greatness, still taught through that text. Nor did these
unhappy quarrels prevent Christianity from maintaining a united front against
gladiatorial shows and against the degrading worship of idols and of the
god-Caesar.

.. [#fn9] Paul’s Greek is very good. He is affected by the philosophical jargon of the Hellenistic schools and by that of Stoicism. But his mastery of sublime language is amazing. —G.  M.

.. [#fn10] In any prayer book of the Episcopalian Church. The Athanasian Creed embodies the view of Athanasius, but probably was not composed by him.

