
29.6 The Struggles and Persecutions of Christianity
========================================================================
So far as it challenged the divinity of Caesar and the
characteristic institutions of the empire, Christianity is to be regarded as a
rebellious and disintegrating movement, and so it was regarded by most of the
emperors before Constantine the Great. It encountered considerable hostility, and
at last systematic attempts to suppress it. Decius was the first emperor to
organize an official persecution, and the great era of the martyrs was in the
time of Diocletian (303 and following years). The persecution of Diocletian was
indeed the crowning struggle of the old idea of the god-emperor against the
already great and powerful organization that denied his divinity. Diocletian
had reorganized the monarchy upon lines of extreme absolutism; he had abolished
the last vestiges of republican institutions; he was the first emperor to
surround himself completely with the awe-inspiring etiquette of an eastern
monarch. He was forced by the logic of his assumptions to attempt the complete
eradication of a system that flatly denied them. The test in the persecution
was that the Christian was required to offer sacrifice to the emperor.

«Though Diocletian, still averse to the effusion of blood,
had moderated the fury of Galerius, who proposed that everyone refusing to
offer sacrifice should immediately be burnt alive, the penalties inflicted on
the obstinacy of the Christians might be deemed sufficiently rigorous and
effectual. It was enacted that their churches, in all the provinces of the
empire, should be demolished to their foundations; and the punishment of death
was denounced against all who should presume to hold any secret assemblies for
the purpose of religious worship. The philosophers, who now assumed the
unworthy office of directing the blind zeal of persecution, had diligently
studied the nature and genius of the Christian religion; and as they were not
ignorant that the speculative doctrines of the faith were supposed to be
contained in the writings of the prophets, of the evangelists, and of the
apostles, they most probably suggested the order that the bishops and
presbyters should deliver all their sacred books into the hands of the
magistrates, who were commanded, under the severest penalties, to burn them in
a public and solemn manner. By the same edict, the property of the church was
at once confiscated; and the several parts of which it might consist were
either sold to the highest bidder, united to the imperial domain, bestowed on
the cities or corporations, or granted to the solicitations of rapacious
courtiers. After taking such effectual measures to abolish the worship, and to
dissolve the government of the Christians, it was thought necessary to subject
to the most intolerable hardships the condition of those perverse individuals
who should still reject the religion of nature, of Rome, and of their
ancestors. Persons of a liberal birth were declared incapable of holding any
honours or employments; slaves were forever deprived of the hopes of freedom;
and the whole body of the Christians were put out of the protection of the law.
The judges were authorized to hear and to determine every action that was
brought against a Christian; but the Christians were not permitted to complain
of any injury which they themselves had suffered; and those unfortunate
sectaries were exposed to the severity, while they were excluded from the benefits,
of public justice. This edict was scarcely exhibited to the public view, in the
most conspicuous place in Nicomedia, before it was torn down by the hands of a
Christian, who expressed at the same time, by the bitterest of invectives, his
contempt as well as abhorrence for such impious and tyrannical governors. His
offence, according to the mildest laws, amounted to treason, and deserved
death, and if it be true that he was a person of rank and education, those
circumstances could serve only to aggravate his guilt. He was burnt, or rather
roasted, by a slow fire; and his executioners, zealous to revenge the personal
insult which had been offered to the emperors, exhausted every refinement of
cruelty without being able to subdue his patience, or to alter the steady and
insulting smile which in his dying agonies he still preserved in his
countenance».\ [#fn11]_ 

So with the death of this unnamed martyr the great
persecution opened. But, as Gibbon points out, our information as to its
severity is of very doubtful value. He estimates the total of victims as about
two thousand, and contrasts this with the known multitudes of Christians
martyred by their fellow-Christians during the period of the Reformation.
Gibbon was strongly prejudiced against Christianity, and here he seems disposed
to minimize the fortitude and sufferings of the Christians. In many provinces,
no doubt, there must have been a great reluctance to enforce the edict. But
there was a hunt for the copies of Holy Writ, and in many places a systematic,
destruction of Christian churches. There were tortures and executions, as well
as a great crowding of the gaols with Christian presbyters and bishops. We have
to remember that the Christian community was now a very considerable element of
the population, and that an influential proportion of the officials charged
with the execution of the edict were themselves of the proscribed faith.
Gelerius, who was in control of the eastern provinces, was among the most
vigorous of the persecutors, but in the end, on his death bed (371), he
realized the futility of his attacks upon this huge community, and granted
toleration in an edict, the gist of which Gibbon translates as follows:

«Among the important cares which have occupied our mind for
the utility and preservation of the empire, it was our intention to correct and
re-establish all things according to the ancient laws and public discipline of
the Romans. We were particularly desirous of reclaiming into the way of reason
and nature the deluded Christians who had renounced the religion and ceremonies
instituted by their fathers; and presumptuously despising the practice of
antiquity, had invented extravagant laws and opinions according to the dictates
of their fancy, and had collected a various society from the different
provinces of our empire. The edicts which we have published to enforce the
worship of the gods having exposed many of the Christians to danger and
distress, many having suffered death, and many more who still persist in their
impious folly, being left destitute of any public exercise of religion, we are
disposed to extend to those unhappy men the effects of our wonted clemency. We
permit them, therefore, freely to profess their private opinions and to
assemble in their conventicles without fear or molestation, provided always
that they preserve a due respect to the established laws and government. By
another rescript we shall signify our intentions to the judges and magistrates;
and we hope that our indulgence will engage the Christians to offer up their
prayers to the deity whom they adore, for our safety and prosperity, for their
own, and for that of the republic».

In a few years Constantine the Great was reigning, first as
associated emperor (312) and then as the sole ruler (324), and the severer
trials of Christianity were over. If Christianity was a rebellious and
destructive force towards a pagan Rome, it was a unifying and organizing force
within its, own communion. This fact the genius of Constantine grasped. The spirit
of Jesus, for all the doctrinal dissensions that prevailed, made a great
freemasonry throughout and even beyond the limits of the empire. The faith was
spreading among the barbarians beyond the border; it had extended into Persia
and Central Asia. It provided the only hope of moral solidarity he could
discern in the great welter of narrow views and self-seeking over which he had
to rule. It, and it alone, had the facilities for organizing 
*will*, for the need of which the empire
was falling to pieces like a piece of rotten cloth. In 312 Constantine had to
fight for Rome and his position against Maxentius. He put the Christian
monogram upon the shields and banners of his troops and claimed that the God of
the Christians had fought for him in his complete victory at the battle of the
Milvian Bridge just outside Rome. By this act he renounced all those
pretensions to divinity that the vanity of Alexander the Great had first
brought into the western world, and with the applause and enthusiastic support
of the Christians he established himself as a monarch more absolute even than
Diocletian.

In a few years' time Christianity had become the official
religion of the empire, and in A.D. 337 Constantine upon is death-bed was
baptized as a Christian.

.. [#fn11] Gibbon, :t:`The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire`, chap xvi.

