
29.7 Constantine the Great
========================================================================
The figure of Constantine the Great is at least as cardinal
in history as that of Alexander the Great or Augustus Caesar. We know very
little of his personality or of his private life; no Plutarch, no Suetonius,
has preserved any intimate and living details about him. Abuse we have of him
from his enemies, and much obviously fulsome panegyric to set against it; but
none of these writers give us a living character of him; he is a party symbol
for them, a partisan flag. It is stated by the hostile Zosimus that, like
Sargon I, he was of illegitimate birth; his father was a distinguished general
and his mother, Helena, an innkeeper’s daughter of Nish in Serbia. Gibbon,
however, is of opinion that there was a valid marriage. In any case it was a
lowly marriage, and the personal genius of Constantine prevailed against
serious disadvantages. He was comparatively illiterate he knew little or no
Greek. It appears to be true that he banished his eldest son Crispus, and
caused him to be executed at the instigation of the young man's stepmother,
Fausta; and it is also recorded that he was afterwards convinced of the
innocence of Crispus, and caused Fausta to be executed–according to one account
by being boiled to death in her bath, and according to another by being exposed
naked to wild beasts on a desolate mountain–while there is also very
satisfactory documentary evidence that she survived him. If she was executed,
the fact remains that her three sons, together with two nephews, became the
appointed heirs of Constantine. Clearly there is nothing solid to be got from
this libellous tangle, and such soufflé as is possible with these scanty
materials is to be found admirably done by Gibbon (chap. xviii.). Gibbon,
because of his anti-Christian animus, is hostile to Constantine; but he admits
that he was temperate and chaste. He accuses him of prodigality because of his
great public buildings, and of being vain and dissolute (!) because in his old
age he wore a wig–Gibbon wore his own hair tied with a becoming black bow–and a
diadem and magnificent robes. But all the later emperors after Diocletian wore
diadems and magnificent robes.

Yet if the personality of Constantine the Great remains
phantom-like, if the particulars of his domestic life reveal nothing but a
vague tragedy, we can still guess at much that was in his mind. It must, in the
closing years of his life, have been a very lonely mind. He was more of an
autocrat than any previous emperor had been–that is to say, he had less counsel
and help. No class of public-spirited and trustworthy men remained; no senate
nor council shared and developed his schemes. How much he apprehended the
geographical weakness of the empire, how far he saw the complete disaster that
was now so near, we can only guess. He made his real capital at Nicomedia in
Bithynia; Constantinople across the Bosphorus was still being built when he
died. Like Diocletian, he seems to have realized the broken-backed outline of
his dominions, and to have concentrated his attention on foreign affairs and more
particularly on the affairs of Hungary, South Russia, and the Black Sea. He
reorganized all the official machinery of the empire; he gave it a new
constitution and sought to establish a dynasty. He was a restless remaker of
things; the social confusion he tried to fix by assisting in the development of
a caste system. This was following up the work of his great predecessor,
Diocletian. He tried to make a caste of the peasants and small cultivators, and
to restrict them from moving from their holdings. In fact he sought to make
them serfs. The supply of slave labour had fallen off because the empire was no
longer an invading but an invaded power; he turned to serfdom as the remedy.
His creative efforts necessitated unprecedentedly heavy taxation. All these
things point to a lonely and forcible mind. It is in his manifest understanding
of the need of some unifying moral force if the empire was to hold together
that his claim to originality lies.

It was only after he had turned to Christianity that he
seems to have realized the fierce dissensions of the theologians. He made a
great effort to reconcile these differences in order to have one uniform and
harmonious teaching in the community, and at his initiative a general council
of the Church was held at Nicaea, a town near Nicomedia and over against
Constantinople, in 325. Eusebius gives a curious account of this strange
gathering, over which the Emperor, although he was not, yet a baptized
Christian, presided. It was not his first council of the Church, for he had
already (in 313) presided over a council at Arles. He sat in the midst of the
council of Nicaea upon a golden throne, and as he had little Greek, we must
suppose he was reduced to watching the countenances and gestures of the
debaters, and listening to their intonations. The council was a stormy one.
When old Arius rose to speak, one Nicholas of Myra struck him in the face, and
afterwards many ran out, thrusting their fingers into their ears in affected
horror at the old man's heresies. One is tempted to imagine the great Emperor,
deeply anxious for the soul of his empire, firmly resolved to end these
divisions, bending towards his interpreters to ask them the meaning of the
uproar.

The views that prevailed at Nicaea are embodied in the
Nicene Creed, a strictly Trinitarian statement and the Emperor sustained the
Trinitan position. But afterwards, when Athanasius sins bore too hardly upon
the Arians, he had him banished from Alexandria; and when the church at
Alexandria would have excommunicated Arius, he obliged it to readmit him to
communion.
