
25.3 The Gospel of Gautama Buddha
========================================================================
The fundamental teaching of Gautama, as it is now being
made plain to us by the study of original sources, is clear and simple and in
the closest harmony with modern ideas. It is beyond all dispute the achievement
of one of the most penetrating intelligences the world has ever known.

We have what are almost certainly the authentic heads of
his discourse to the five disciples which embodies his essential doctrine. All
the miseries and discontents of life he traces to insatiable selfishness.
Suffering, he teaches, is due to the craving individuality, to the torment of
greedy desire. Until a man has overcome every sort of personal craving his life
is trouble and his end sorrow. There are three principal forms the craving of
life takes, and all are evil. The first is the desire to gratify the senses,
sensuousness. The second is the desire for personal immortality. The third is
the desire for prosperity, worldliness. All these must be overcome –that is to
say, a man must no longer be living for himself–before life can become serene.
But when they are indeed overcome and no longer rule a man's life, when the
first personal pronoun has vanished from his private thoughts, then he has
reached the higher wisdom, Nirvana, serenity of soul. For Nirvana does not
mean, as many people wrongly believe, extinction, but the extinction of the
futile personal aims that necessarily make life base or pitiful or dreadful.

Now here, surely we have the completest analysis of the
problem of the soul's peace. Every religion that is worth the name, every
philosophy, warns us to lose ourselves in something greater than ourselves.
«Whosoever would save his life, shall lose it;» there is exactly the same
lesson.

The teaching of history, as we are unfolding it in this
book, is strictly in accordance with this teaching of Buddha. There is, as we
are seeing, no social order, no security, no peace or happiness, no righteous
leadership or kingship, unless men lose themselves in something greater than
themselves. The study of biological progress again reveals exactly the same
process–the merger of the narrow globe of the individual experience in a wider
being (compare what has been said in Chaps. XI and XVI). To forget oneself in
greater interests is to escape from a prison.

The self-abnegation must be complete. From the point of
view of Gautama, that dread of death, that greed for an endless continuation of
his mean little individual life which drove the Egyptian and those who learnt
from him with propitiations and charms into the temples, was as mortal and ugly
and evil a thing as lust or avarice or hate. The religion of Gautama is flatly
opposite to the «immortality» religious. And his teaching is set like flint
against asceticism, as a mere attempt to win personal power by personal pains.

But when we come to the rule of life, the Aryan Path, by
which we are to escape from the threefold base cravings that dishonour human
life, then the teaching is not so clear. It is not so clear for one very
manifest reason, Gautama had no knowledge nor vision of history; he had no
clear sense of the vast and many-sided adventure of life opening out in space
and time. His mind was confined within the ideas of his age and people, and
their minds were shaped into notions of perpetual recurrence, of world
following world and of Buddha following Buddha, a stagnant circling of the
universe. The idea of mankind as a great Brotherhood pursuing an endless
destiny under the God of Righteousness, the idea that was already dawning upon
the Semitic consciousness in Babylon at this time, did not exist in his world.
Yet his account of the Eightfold Path is, nevertheless, within these
limitations, profoundly wise.

Let us briefly recapitulate the eight elements of the Aryan
Path. First, Right Views; Gautama placed the stern examination of views and
ideas, the insistence upon truth as the first research of his followers. There
was to be no clinging to tawdry superstitions. He condemned, for instance, the
prevalent belief in the transmigration of souls. In a well-known early Buddhist
dialogue there is a destructive analysis of the idea of an enduring individual
soul. Next to Right Views came Right Aspirations; because nature abhors a
vacuum, and since base cravings are to be expelled, other desires must be
encouraged–love for the service of others, desire to do and secure justice and
the like. Primitive and uncorrupted Buddhism aimed not at the destruction of
desire, but at the change of desire. Devotion to science and art, or to the
betterment of things manifestly falls into harmony with the Buddhistic Right
Aspirations, provided such aims are free from jealousy or the craving for fame.
Right Speech, Right Conduct, and Right Livelihood, need no expansion here.
Sixthly in this list came Right Effort, for Gautama had no toleration for good
intentions and slovenly application; the disciple had to keep a keenly critical
eye upon his activities. The seventh element of the path, Right Mindfulness, is
the constant guard against a lapse into personal feeling or glory for whatever
is done or not done. And, finally, comes Right Rapture, which seems to be aimed
against the pointless ecstasies of the devout, such witless gloryings, for
instance, as those that went to the jingle of the Alexandrian sistrum.

We will not discuss here the Buddhistic doctrine of Karma,
because it belongs to a world of thought that is passing away. The good or evil
of every life was supposed to determine the happiness or misery of some
subsequent life, that was in some inexplicable way identified with its
predecessor. Nowadays we realize that a life goes on in its consequences forever,
but we find no necessity to suppose that any particular life resumes again. The
Indian mind was full of the idea of cyclic recurrence; everything was supposed
to come round again. This is a very natural supposition for men to make; so
things seem to be until we analyze them. Modern science has made clear to us
that there is no such exact recurrence, as we are apt to suppose; every day is
by an infinitesimal quantity a little longer than the day before; no generation
repeats the previous generation precisely; history never repeats itself;
change, we realize now, is inexhaustible; all things are eternally new. But
these differences between our general ideas and those Buddha must have
possessed need not in any way prevent us from appreciating the unprecedented
wisdom, the goodness, and the greatness of this plan of an emancipated life as
Gautama laid it down somewhen in the sixth century before Christ.

And if he failed in theory to gather together all the wills
of the converted into the one multifarious activity of our race, battling
against death and deadness in time and space, he did in practice direct his own
life and that of all his immediate disciples into one progressive adventure,
which was to preach and spread the doctrine and methods of Nirvana or
soul-serenity throughout our fevered world. For them at least his teaching was
complete and full. But all men cannot preach or teach; doctrine is but one of
many of the functions of life that are fundamentally righteous. To the modern
mind it seems at least equally acceptable that a man may, though perhaps
against greater difficulties, cultivate the soil, rule a city, make roads,
build houses, construct engines, or seek and spread knowledge, in perfect self-forgetfulness
and serenity. As much was inherent in Gautama's teaching, but the stress was
certainly laid upon the teaching itself, and upon withdrawal from rather than
upon the ennoblement of the ordinary affairs of men.

In certain other respects this primitive Buddhism differed
from any of the religions we have hitherto considered. It was primarily a
religion of conduct, not a religion of observances and sacrifices. It had no
temples, and since it had no sacrifices, it had no sacred order of priests. Nor
had it any theology. It neither asserted nor denied the reality of the
innumerable and often grotesque gods who were worshipped in India at that time.
It passed them by.
