
33.2 The Rise and Victories of the Mongols
========================================================================
.. _Figure 671:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0671.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0671.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 671

    Figure 671: Empire of Jengis Khan at his death, 1227

The career of conquest of Jengis Khan and his immediate successors astounded
the world, and probably astounded no one more than these Mongol Khans
themselves.

The Mongols were in the twelfth century a tribe subject to those Kin who had
conquered North-east China. They were a horde of nomadic horsemen living in
tents, and subsisting mainly upon mare's milk products and meat. Their
occupations were pasturage and hunting, varied by war. They drifted northward as
the snows melted for summer pasture, and southward to winter pasture after the
custom of the steppes. Their military education began with a successful
insurrection against the Kin. The empire of Kin had the resources of half China
behind it, and in the struggle the Mongols learnt very much of the military
science of the Chinese. By the end of the twelfth century they were already a
fighting tribe of exceptional quality.

The opening years of the career of Jengis were spent in developing his
military machine, in assimilating the Mongols and the associated tribes about
them into one organized army. His first considerable extension of power was
westward, when the Tartar Kirghis and the Uigurs (who were the Tartar people of
the Tarim basin) were not so much conquered as induced to join his organization.
He then attacked the Kin Empire and took Pekin (1214). The Khitan people, who
had been so recently subdued by the Kin, threw in their fortunes with his, and
were of very great help to him. The settled Chinese population went on sowing
and reaping and trading during this change of masters without lending its weight
to either side.

We have already mentioned the very recent Kharismian Empire of Turkestan,
Persia, and North India. This empire extended eastward to Kashgar, and it must
have seemed one of the most progressive and hopeful empires of the time. Jengis
Khan, while still engaged in this war with the Kin Empire, sent envoys to
Kharismia. They were put to death, an almost incredible stupidity. The
Kharismian government, to use the political jargon of today, had decided not to
«recognize» Jengis Khan, and took this spirited course with him. There upon
(1218) the great host of horsemen that Jengis Khan had consolidated and
disciplined swept over the Pamirs and down into Turkestan. It was well armed,
and probably it had some guns and gunpowder for siege work for the Chinese were
certainly using gunpowder at this time, and the Mongols learnt its use from
them. Kashgar, Khokand, Bokhara fell and then Samarkand, the capital of the
Kharismian empire. There after nothing held the Mongols in the Kharismian
territories. They swept westward to the Caspian, and southward as far as Lahore.
To the north of the Caspian a Mongol army encountered a Russian force from
Kieff. There was a series of battles, in which the Russian armies were finally
defeated and the Grand Duke of Kieff taken prisoner.

So it was the Mongols appeared on the northern shores of the Black Sea. A
panic swept Constantinople, which set itself to reconstruct its fortifications.
Meanwhile other armies were engaged in the conquest of the empire of the Asia in
China. This was annexed, and only the southern part of the Kin Empire remained
unsubdued. In 1227 Jengis Khan died in the midst of a career of triumph. His
empire reached already from the Pacific to the Dnieper. And it was an empire
still vigorously expanding.

Like all the empires founded by nomads, it was, to begin with, purely a
military and administrative empire, a framework rather than a rule. It centered
on the personality of the monarch, and its relations with the mass of the
populations over which it ruled was simply one of taxation for the maintenance
of the horde. But Jengis Khan had called to his aid a very able and experienced
administrator of the Kin Empire, who was learned in all the traditions an
science of the Chinese.

This statesman, Yeliu Chutsai, was able to carry on the affairs of the
Mongols long after the death of Jengis Khan, and there can be little doubt that
he is one of the great political heroes of history. He tempered the barbaric
ferocity of his masters, and saved innumerable cities and works of art from
destruction. He collected archives and inscriptions, and when he was accused of
corruption, his sole wealth was found to consist of documents and a few musical
instruments. To him perhaps quite as much as to Jengis is the efficiency of the
Mongol military machine to be ascribed. Under Jengis, we may note further, we
find the completest religious toleration established across the entire breadth
of Asia.

At the death of Jengis the capital of the new empire was still in the great
an assembly of Mongol leaders elected Ogdai Khan, the son of Jengis, as his
successor. The war against the vestiges of the Kin Empire was prosecuted until
Kin was altogether subdued (1234). The Chinese empire to the south under the
Sung dynasty helped the Mongols in this task, so destroying their own bulwark
against the universal conquerors. The Mongol hosts then swept right across Asia
to Russia (1235) , an amazing march. Kieff was destroyed in 1240, and nearly all
Russia became tributary to the Mongols. Poland was ravaged, and a mixed army of
Poles and Germans was annihilated at the battle of Liegnitz in Lower Silesia in
1241. The Emperor Frederick II does not seem to have made any great efforts to
stay the advancing tide.

«It is only recently», says Bury in his notes to Gibbon's *Decline and Fall
of the Roman Empire* «, that European history has begun to understand that
the successes of the Mongol army which overran Poland and occupied Hungary in
the spring of A.D. 1241 were won by consummate strategy and were not due to a
mere overwhelming superiority of numbers. But this fact has not yet become a
matter of common knowledge; the vulgar opinion which represents the Tartars as a
wild horde carrying all before them solely by their multitude, and galloping
through Eastern Europe without a strategic plan, rushing at all obstacles and
overcoming them by mere weight, still prevails . . .

«It was wonderful how punctually and effectually the arrangements of the
commander were carried out in operations extending from the Lower Vistula to
Transylvania. Such a campaign was quite beyond the power of any European army of
the time, and it was beyond the vision of any European commander. There was no
general in Europe, from Frederick II downward, who was not a tyro in strategy
compared to Subutai. It should also be noticed that the Mongols embarked upon
the enterprise with full knowledge of the political situation of Hungary and the
condition of Poland they had taken care to inform themselves by a well organized
system of spies; on the other hand, the Hungarians and Christian powers, like
childish barbarians, knew hardly anything about their enemies».

But though the Mongols were victorious at Liegnitz, they did not continue
their drive westward. They were getting into woodlands and hilly country, which
did not suit their tactics; and so they turned southward and prepared to settle
in Hungary, massacring or assimilating the kindred Magyar, even as these had
previously massacred and assimilated the mixed Scythians and Avars and Huns
before them. From the Hungarian plain they would probably have made raids west
and south as the Hungarians had done in the ninth century, the Avars in the
seventh and eighth, and the Huns in the fifth. But in Asia the Mongols were
fighting a stiff war of conquest against the Sung, and, they were also raiding
Persia and Asia Minor; Ogdai died suddenly, and in 1242 there was trouble about
the succession, and recalled by this, the undefeated hosts of Mongols began to
pour back across Hungary and Rumania towards the east.

To the great relief of Europe the dynastic troubles at Karakorum lasted for
some years, and this vast new empire showed signs of splitting up. Mangu Khan
became the Great Khan in 1251, and he nominated his brother Kublai Khan as
Governor General of China. Slowly but surely the entire Sung empire was
subjugated, and as it was subjugated the eastern Mongols became more and more
Chinese in their culture and methods. Tibet was invaded and devastated by Mangu,
and Persia and Syria invaded in good earnest. Another brother of Maugu, Hulagu,
was in command of this latter war; He turned his arms against the caliphate and
captured Bagdad, in which city he perpetrated a massacre of the entire
population. Bagdad was still the religious capital of Islam, and the Mongols had
become bitterly hostile to the Moslems. This hostility exacerbated the natural
discord of nomad and townsman. In 1259 Mangu died, and in 1260—for it took the
best part of a year for the Mongol leaders to gather from the extremities of
this vast empire, from Hungary and Syria and Seind and China—Kublai was elected
Great Khan. He was already deeply interested in Chinese affairs; he made his
capital Pekin instead of Karakorum, and Persia, Syria, and Asia Minor became
virtually independent under his brother Hulagu, while the hordes of Mongols in
Russia and Asia next to Russia, and various smaller Mongol groups in Turkestan
became also practically separate. Kublai died in 1294, and with his death even
the titular supremacy of the Great Khan disappeared.

At the death of Kublai there was a main Mongol empire, with Pekin as its
capital, including all China and Mongolia; there was a second great Mongol
empire, that of Kipchak in Russia; there was a third in Persia, that founded by
Hulagu, the Ilkhan empire, to which the Seljuk Turks in Asia Minor were
tributary; there was a Siberian state, between Kipchak and Mongolia; and another
separate state «Great Turkey» in Turkestan. It is particularly remarkable that
India beyond the Punjab was never invaded by the Mongols during this period, and
that an army under the Sultan of Egypt completely defeated Ketboga, Hulagu's
general, in Palestine (1260), and stopped them from entering Africa. By 1260 the
impulse of Mongol conquest had already passed its zenith. Thereafter the Mongol
story is one of division and decay.

The Mongol dynasty that Kublai Khan had founded in China, the Yuan dynasty
lasted from 1280 until 1368. Later on a recrudescence of Mongolian energy in
Western Asia was destined, to create a still more enduring monarchy in
India.

