
33.3 The Travels of Marco Polo
========================================================================

.. _Figure 676:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0676.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0676.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 676

    Figure 676: Map — Marco Polo's Travels

    Mongol states around 1280 A.D.

Now this story of Mongolian conquests is surely the most remarkable in all
history. The conquests of Alexander the Great cannot compare with them in
extent. And their effect in diffusing and broadening men's ideas, though such
things are more difficult to estimate, is at least comparable to the spread of
the Hellenic civilization which is associated with Alexander's adventure. For a
time all Asia and Western Europe enjoyed an open intercourse; all the roads were
temporarily open, and representatives of every nation appeared at the court of
Karakorum. The barriers between Europe and Asia set up by the religious feud of
Christianity and Islam were lowered. Great hopes were entertained by the papacy
for the conversion of the Mongols to Christianity. Their only religion so far
had been Shamanism, a primitive paganism. Envoys of the Pope, Buddhist priests
from India, Parisian and Italian and Chinese artificers, Byzantine and Armenian
merchants, mingled with Arab officials and Persian and Indian astronomers and
mathematicians at the Mongol court. We hear too much in history of the campaigns
and massacres of the Mongols, and not enough of their indubitable curiosity and
zest for learning. Not perhaps as an originative people, but as transmitters of
knowledge and method their influence upon the world's history has been enormous.
And everything one can learn of the vague and romantic personalities of Jengis
or Kublai tends to confirm the impression that these men were built upon a
larger scale, and were at least as understanding and creative monarchs as either
that flamboyant but egotistical figure Alexander the Great, or that raiser of
political ghosts, that energetic but illiterate theologian, Charlemagne.

The missionary enterprises of the papacy in Mongolia ended in failure.
Christianity was losing its persuasive power. The Mongols had no prejudice
against Christianity; they evidently preferred it at first to Islam; but the
missions that came to them were manifestly using the power in the great
teachings of Jesus to advance the vast claims of the Pope to world dominion.

Christianity so vitiated was not good enough for the Mongol mind. To make the
empire of the Mongols part of the kingdom of God might have appealed to them;
but not to make it a fief of a group of French and Italian priests, whose claims
were as gigantic as their powers and outlook were feeble, who, were now the
creatures of the Emperor of Germany, now the nominees of the King of France, and
now the victims of their own petty spites and vanities. In 1269 Kublai Khan sent
a mission to the Pope with the evident intention of finding some common mode of
action with Western Christendom. He asked that a hundred men of learning and
ability should be sent to his court to establish an understanding. His mission
found the Western world popeless, and engaged in one of those disputes about the
succession that are so frequent in the history of the papacy. For two years
there was no pope at all. When at last a pope was appointed, he dispatched two
Dominican friars to convert the greatest power in Asia to his rule those worthy
men were appalled by the length and hardship of the journey before them, and
found an early excuse for abandoning the expedition.

But this abortive mission was only one of a number of attempts to
communicate, and always they were feeble and feeble spirited attempts, with
nothing of the conquering fire of the earlier Christian missions. Innocent IV
had already sent some Dominicans to Karakorum, and St. Louis of France had also
dispatched missionaries and relies by way of Persia; Mangu Khan had numerous
Nestorian Christians at his court, and subsequent papal envoys actually reached
Pekin. We hear of the appointment of various legates, and bishops to the East,
but many of these seem to, have lost themselves and perhaps their lives before
they reached China. There was a papal legate in Pekin in 1346, but he seems to
have been a mere papal diplomatist. With the downfall of the Mongolian (Yuan)
dynasty (1368), the dwindling opportunity of the Christian missions passed
altogether. The house of Yuan was followed by that of Ming, a strongly
nationalist Chinese dynasty, at first very hostile to all foreigners. There may
have been a massacre of the Christian missions. Until the later days of the
Mings (1644) little more is heard of Christianity, whether Nestorian or
Catholic, in China. Then a fresh and rather more successful attempt to propagate
Catholic Christianity in China was made by the Jesuits, but this second
missionary wave reached China by the sea.

In the year 1298 a naval battle occurred between the Genoese and the
Venetians, in which the latter were defeated. Among the 7,000 prisoners taken by
the Genoese was a Venetian gentleman named Marco Polo, who had been a great
traveler, and who was very generally believed by his neighbours to, be given to
exaggeration. He had taken part in that first mission to Kublai Khan, and had
gone on when the two Dominicans turned back. While this Marco Polo was a
prisoner in Genoa, he beguiled his tedium by talking of his travels to a certain
writer named Rusticiano, who wrote them down. We will not enter here into the
vexed question of the exact authenticity of Rusticiano's story—we do not
certainly know in what language it was written—but there can be no doubt of the
general truth of this remarkable narrative, which became enormously popular in
the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries with all men of active intelligence.
*The Travels of Marco Polo* is one of the great books of history. It o pens
this world of the thirteenth century, this century, which saw the reign of
Frederick II and the beginnings of the Inquisition, to our imaginations as no
mere historian's chronicle can do. It led directly to the discovery of
America.

It begins by telling of the journey of Marco's father, Nicolo Polo, and
uncle, Maffeo. Polo, to China. These two were Venetian merchants of standing,
living in Constantinople, and some when about 1260 they went to the Crimea and
thence to Kazan; from that place they journeyed to Bokhara, and at Bokhara they
fell in with a party of envoys from Kublai Khan in China to his brother Hulagu
in Persia. These envoys pressed them to come on to the Great Khan, who at that
time had never seen men of the «Latin» peoples. They went on; and it is clear
they made a very favourable impression upon Kublai, and interested him greatly
in the civilization of Christendom. They were made the bearers of that request
for a hundred teachers and learned men, «intelligent men acquainted with the
Seven Arts, able to enter into controversy and able clearly to prove to
idolators and other kinds of folk that the Law of Christ was best», to which we
have just alluded. But when they returned Christendom was in a phase of
confusion, and it was only after a delay of two years that they got their
authorization to start for China again in the company of those two faint-hearted
Dominicans. They took with them Young Marco, and it is due to his presence and
the boredom of his subsequent captivity at Genoa that this most interesting
experience has been preserved to us.

The three Polos started by way of Palestine and not by the Crimea, as in the
previous expedition. They had with them a gold tablet and other indications from
the Great Khan that must have greatly facilitated their journey. The Great Kahn
had asked for some oil from the lamp that burns in the Holy Sepulchre at
Jerusalem; and so thither they first went, and then by way of Cilicia into
Armenia. They went thus far north because the Sultan of Egypt was raiding the
Ilkhan domains at this time. Thence they came by way of Mesopotamia to Ormuz on
the Persian Gulf, as if they contemplated a sea voyage. At Ormuz they met
merchants from India. For some reason they did not take ship, but instead turned
northward through the Persian deserts, and so by way of Balkh over the Pamir to
Kashgar, and by way of Kotan and the Lob Nor (so, following in the footsteps of
Yuan Chwang) into the Hwangho, valley and on to Pekin. Pekin, Polo calls
«Cambaluc»; Northern China, «Cathay» (Khitan); and Southern China of the former
Sung dynasty, «Manzi». At Pekin was the Great Khan, and they were hospitably
entertained. Marco particularly pleased Kublai; he was young and clever, and it
is clear he had mastered the Tartar language very thoroughly. He was given an
official position and sent on several missions, chiefly in South-west China. The
tale he had to tell of vast stretches of smiling and prosperous country, «all
the way excellent hostelries for travellers», and «fine vineyards, fields and
gardens», of «many abbeys» of Buddhist monks, of manufactures of «cloth of silk
and gold and many fine taffetas», a «constant succession of cities and
boroughs», and so on, first roused the incredulity and then fired the
imagination of all Europe. He told of Burmah, and of its great armies with
hundreds of elephants, and how these animals were defeated by the Mongol bowmen,
and also of the Mongol conquest of Pegu. He told of Japan, and greatly
exaggerated the amount of gold in that country. And, still more wonderful, he
told of Christians and Christian rulers in China, and of a certain «Prester
John», John the Priest, who was the «king» of a Christian people. Those people
he had not seen. Apparently they were a tribe of Nestorian Tartars in Mongolia.
An understandable excitement probably made Rusticiano over emphasize what must
have seemed to him the greatest marvel of the whole story, and Prester John
became one of the most stimulating legends of the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries. It encouraged European enterprise enormously to think that far away
in China was a community of their co-religionists, presumably ready to welcome
and assist them. For three years Marco ruled the city of Yang-chow as governor,
and he probably impressed the Chinese inhabitants as being very little more of a
foreigner than any Tartar would have been. He may also have been sent on a
mission to India. Chinese records mention a certain Polo attached to the
imperial council in 1277, a very valuable confirmation of the general truth of
the Polo story.

The Polos had taken about three and a half years to get to China. They stayed
there upwards of sixteen then they began to feel homesick. They were protégés of
Kublai, and possibly they felt that his favours roused a certain envy that might
have disagreeable results after his death. They sought his permission to return.
For a time he refused it, and then an opportunity occurred. Argon, the Ilkhan
monarch of Persia, the grandson of Hulagu, Kublai's brother, had lost his Mongol
wife, and on her deathbed had promised not to wed any other woman but a Mongol
of her own tribe. He sent ambassadors to Pekin, and a suitable princess was
selected, a girl of seventeen. To spare her the fatigues of the caravan route,
it was decided to send her by sea with a suitable escort. The «Barons» in charge
of her asked for the company of the Polos because these latter were experienced
travellers and sage men, and the Polos snatched at this opportunity of getting
homeward. The expedition sailed from some port on the east of South China; they
stayed long in Sumatra and South India, and they reached Persia after a voyage
of two years. They delivered the young lady safely to Argon's successor -for
Argon was dead- and she married Argon's son. The Polos then went by Tabriz to
Trebizond, sailed to Constantinople, and got back to Venice about 1295. It is
related that the returned travellers, dressed in Tartar garb, were refused
admission to their own house. It was some time before they could establish their
identity. Many people who admitted that, were still inclined to look askance at
them as shabby wanderers; and, in order to dispel such doubts, they gave a great
feast, and when it was at its height they had their old padded suits brought to
them, dismissed the servants, and then ripped open these garments, whereupon an
incredible display of «rubies, sapphires, carbuncles, emeralds, and diamonds»
poured out before the dazzled company. Even after this, Marco's accounts of the
size and population of China were received with much furtive mockery. The wits
nicknamed him *Il Milione,* because he was always talking of millions of
people and millions of ducats.

Such was the, story that raised eyebrows first in Venice and then throughout
the Western world. The European literature, and especially the European romance
of the fifteenth century, echoes with the names in Marco, Polo's story, with
Cathay and Cambaluc and the like.

