
33.4 The Ottoman Turks and Constantinople
========================================================================

.. _Figure 684:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0684.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0684.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 684

    Figure 684: The Ottoman Empire before 1453.

These travels of Marco Polo were only the beginning of a very considerable
intercourse. That intercourse was to bring many revolutionary ideas and many
revolutionary things to Europe, including a greatly extended use of paper and
printing from blocks, the almost equally revolutionary use of gunpowder in
warfare, and the mariner's compass which was to release the European shipping
from navigation by coasting. The popular imagination has always been disposed to
ascribe every such striking result to Marco Polo. He has become the type and
symbol for all such interchanges. As a matter of fact, there is no evidence that
he had any share in these three importations. There were many mute Marco Polos
who never met their Rusticianos, and history has not preserved their names.
Before we go on, however, to, describe the great widening of the mental horizons
of Europe that was now beginning, and to, which this book of travels was to
contribute very materially, it will be convenient first to note a curious side
consequence of the great Mongol conquests, the appearance of the Ottoman Turks
upon the Dardanelles, and next to state in general terms the breaking up and
development of the several parts of the empire of Jengis Khan.

The Ottoman Turks were a little band of fugitives who fled southwesterly
before the first invasion of Western Turkestan by Jengis. They made their long
way from Central Asia, over deserts and mountains and through alien populations,
seeking some new lands in which they might settle. «A small band of alien
herdsmen», says Sir Mark Sykes, «wandering unchecked through crusades and
counter-crusades, principalities, empires, and states. Where they camped, how
they moved and preserved their flocks and herds, where they found pasture, how
they made their peace with the various chiefs through whose territories they
passed, are questions which one may well ask in wonder».

They found a resting-place at last and kindred and congenial neighbours on
the tablelands of Asia Minor among the Seljuk Turks. Most of this country, the
modern Anatolia, was now largely Turkish in speech and Moslem in religion,
except that there was a considerable proportion of Greeks, Jews, and Armenians
in the town populations. No doubt the various strains of Hittite, Phrygian,
Trojan, Lydian, Ionian Greek, Cimmerian, Galatian, and Italian (from the
Pergamus times) still flowed in the blood of the people, but they had long since
forgotten these ancestral elements. They were indeed much the same blend of
ancient Mediterranean dark whites, Nordic Aryans, Semites and Mongolians as were
the inhabitants of the Balkan peninsula, but they believed themselves to be a
pure Turanian race, and altogether superior to the Christians on the other side
of the Bosphorus.

Gradually the Ottoman Turks became important, and at last dominant among the
small principalities into which the Seljuk Empire, the empire of «Roum», had
fallen. Their relations with the dwindling empire of Constantinople remained for
some centuries tolerantly hostile. They made no attack upon the Bosphorus, but
they got a footing in Europe at the Dardanelles, and, using this route, the
route of Xerxes and not the route of Darius, they pushed their way steadily into
Macedonia, Epirus, Illyria, Yugo-Slavia, and Bulgaria. In the Serbs (Yugoslavs)
and Bulgarians the Turks found people very like themselves in culture and,
though neither side recognized it, probably very similar in racial admixture,
with a little less of the dark Mediterranean and Mongolian strains than the
Turks and a trifle more of the Nordic element. But these Balkan peoples were
Christians, and bitterly divided among themselves. The Turks on the other hand
spoke one language; they had a greater sense of unity, they had the, Moslem
habits of temperance and frugality, and they were on the whole better soldiers.
They converted what they could of the conquered people to Islam; the Christians
they disarmed, and conferred upon them the monopoly of tax paying. Gradually the
Ottoman princes consolidated an, empire that reached from Taurus Mountains in
the east to Hungary and Roumania in the west. Adrianople became their chief
city. They surrounded the shrunken empire of Constantinople on every side.

The Ottomans organized a standing military force, the Janissaries, rather on
the lines of the Mamelukes of dominated Egypt. These troops were formed of
levies of Christian youths to the extent of one thousand per annum, who were
affiliated to the Bektashi order of dervishes, and though at first not obliged
to embrace Islam, were one and all strongly imbued with the mystic and fraternal
ideas of the confraternity to which they were attached. Highly, paid, well
disciplined, a close and jealous secret society, the Janissaries provided the
newly formed Ottoman state with a patriotic force of trained infantry soldiers,
which, in an age of light cavalry and hired companies of mercenaries, was an
invaluable asset . . .

«The relations between the Ottoman Sultans and the Emperors has been singular
in the annals of Moslem and Christian states. The Turks had been involved in the
family and dynastic quarrels of the Imperial City, were bound by ties of blood
to the ruling families, frequently supplied troops for the defense of
Constantinople, and on occasion hired parts of its garrison to assist them in
their various campaigns; the sons of the Emperors and Byzantine statesmen even
accompanied the Turkish forces in the field, yet the Ottomans never ceased to
annex Imperial territories and cities both in Asia and Thrace. This curious
intercourse between the House of Osman and the Imperial government had a
profound effect on both institutions; the Greeks grew more and more debased and
demoralized by the shifts and tricks that their military weakness obliged them
to adopt towards their neighbours, the Turks were corrupted by the alien
atmosphere of intrigue and treachery which crept into their domestic life.
Fratricide and parricide, the two crimes which most frequently stained the
annals of the Imperial Palace, eventually formed a part of the policy of the
Ottoman dynasty. One of the sons of Murad I embarked on an intrigue with
Andronicus, the son of the Greek Emperor, to murder their respective fathers . .
.

«The Byzantine found it more easy to negotiate with the Ottoman Pasha than
with the Pope. For years the Turks and Byzantines had intermarried, and hunted
in couples in strange bypaths of diplomacy. The Ottoman had played the Bulgar
and the Serb of Europe against the Emperor, just as the Emperor had played the
Asiatic Amir against the Sultan; the Greek and Turkish Royal Princes had
mutually agreed to hold each other's rivals as prisoners and hostages; in fact,
Turk and Byzantine policy had so intertwined that it is difficult to say whether
the Turks regarded the Greeks as their allies, enemies, or subjects, or whether
the Greeks looked upon the Turks as their tyrants, destroyers, or protectors. .
. ».\ [#fn1]_ 

It was in 1453, under the Ottoman Sultan, Muhammad II, that Constantinople
last fell to, the Moslems. He attacked it from the European side, and with a
great power of artillery. The Greek Emperor was killed, and there was much
looting and massacre. The great church of St. Sophia, which Justinian the Great
had built (532) was plundered of its treasures and turned at once into a mosque.
This event sent, a wave of excitement throughout Europe, and an attempt was made
to organize a crusade, but the days of the crusades were past.

.. _Figure 686:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0686.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0686.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 686

    Figure 686: Map — Ottoman Empire, 1566

    Extent of the Ottoman Empire at the death of Suleiman the
    Magnificent, 1566.

Says Sir Mark Sykes: «To, the Turks the capture of Constantinople was a
crowning mercy and yet a fatal blow. Constantinople had been the tutor and
polisher of the Turks. So long as the Ottomans could draw science, learning,
philosophy, art, and tolerance from a living fountain of civilization in the
heart of their dominions, so long had the Ottomans not only brute force, but
intellectual power. So long as the Ottoman Empire had in Constantinople a free
port, a market, a centre of world finance, a pool of gold, an exchange, so long
did the Ottomans never lack for money and financial support. Muhammad was a
great statesman, the moment he entered Constantinople be endeavoured to stay the
damage his ambition had done; he supported the patriarch, he conciliated the
Greeks, he did all he could to continue Constantinople the city of the Emperors
. . . but the fatal step had been taken, Constantinople as the city of the
Sultans was Constantinople no more; the markets died away, the culture and
civilization fled, the complex finance faded from sight; and the Turks had lost
their governors and their support. On the other hand, the corruptions of
Byzantium remained, the bureaucracy, the eunuchs, the palace guards, the spies,
and the bribers, go-betweens—all these the Ottomans took over, and all these
survived in luxuriant life. The Turks, in taking Stambul, let slip a treasure
and gained a pestilence . . ».

Muhammad's ambition was not sated by the capture of Constantinople. He set
his eyes also upon Rome. He captured and looted the Italian town of Otranto, and
it is probable that a very vigorous and perhaps successful attempt to conquer
Italy for the peninsula was divided against itself was averted only by his death
(1481). His sons engaged in fratricidal strife. Under Bayezid II (1481-1512),
his successor, war was carried into Poland, and most of Greece was conquered.
Selim (1512-1520), the son of Bayezid, extended the Ottoman power over Armenia
and conquered Egypt. In Egypt, the last Abbasid Caliph was living under the
protection of the Mameluke Sultan—for the Fatimite caliphate was a thing of the
past. Selim bought the title of Caliph from this last degenerate Abbasid, and
acquired the sacred banner and other relies of the Prophet. So the Ottoman
Sultan became also Caliph of all Islam. Selim was followed by Suleiman the
Magnificent (1520-1566), who conquered Bagdad in the east and the greater part
of Hungary in the west, and very nearly captured Vienna.

His fleets also took Algiers, and inflicted a number of reverses upon the
Venetians. In most of his warfare with the empire he was in alliance with the
French. Under him the Ottoman power reached its zenith.

.. [#fn1] Sir Mark Sykes, :t:`The Caliphs’ Last Heritage`.
