
33.5 Why the Mongols were not Christianized
========================================================================
Let us now very briefly run over the subsequent development of the main
masses of the empire of the Great Khan. In no case did Christianity succeed in
capturing the imagination of these Mongol states. Christianity was in a phase of
moral and intellectual insolvency, without any collective faith, energy, or
honour; we have told of the wretched brace of timid Dominicans which was the
Pope's reply to the appeal of Kublai Khan, and we have noted the general
fail-tire of the overland missions of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries.
That apostolic passion that could win whole nations to the Kingdom of Heaven was
dead in the church.

In 1305, as we have told, the Pope became the kept pontiff of the French
king. All the craft and policy of the Popes of the thirteenth century to oust
the Emperor from Italy had only served to let in the French to replace him. From
1305 to 1377 the Popes remained at Avignon; and such slight missionary effort as
they made was merely a part of the strategy of Western European politics. In
1377 the Pope Gregory XI did indeed re-enter Rome and die there, but the French
cardinals split off from the others at the election of his successor, and two
Popes were elected, one at Avignon and one at Rome. This split, the Great
Schism, lasted from 1378 to 1418. Each Pope cursed the other, and put all his
supporters under an interdict. Such was the state of Christianity, and such were
now the custodians of the teachings of Jesus of Nazareth. All Asia was white
unto harvest, but there was no effort to reap it.

When at last the church was reunited and missionary energy returned with the
foundation of the order of the Jesuits, the days of opportunity were over. The
possibility of a worldwide moral unification of East and West through
Christianity had passed away. The Mongols in China and Central Asia turned to
Buddhism; in South Russia, Western Turkestan, and the Ilkhan Empire they
embraced Islam.

