
33.5.3 The Kipchak Empire and the Tsar of Muscovy
========================================================================
The Mongols of the great realm of Kipchak remained nomadic and grazed their
stock across the wide plains of South Russia and Western Asia adjacent to
Russia. They became not very devout Moslems, retaining many traces of their
earlier barbaric Shamanism. Their chief Khan was the Khan of the Golden Horde.
To the west, over large tracts of open country, and more particularly in what is
now known as Ukrainia, the old Scythian population, Slavs with a Mongol
admixture, reverted to a similar nomadic life. These Christian nomads, the
Cossacks, formed a sort of frontier screen against the Tartars, and their free
and adventurous life was so attractive to the peasants of Poland and Lithuania
that severe laws had to be passed to prevent a vast migration from the
plough-lands to the steppes. The serf-owning landlords of Poland regarded the
Cossacks with considerable hostility on this account, and war was as frequent
between the Polish chivalry and the Cossacks as it was between the latter and
the Tartars.

In the empire of Kipchak, as in Turkestan almost up to the present time,
while the nomads roamed over wide areas, a number of towns and cultivated
regions sustained a settled population which usually paid tribute to the nomad
Khan. In such towns as Kieff, Moscow, and the like, the pre-Mongol, Christian
town life went on under Russian dukes or Tartar governors, who collected the
tribute for the Khan of the Golden Horde. The Grand Duke of Moscow gained the
confidence of the Khan, and gradually, under his authority, obtained an
ascendancy over many of his fellow tributaries. In the fifteenth century. Under
its grand duke, Ivan III, Ivan the Great (1462-1505) Moscow threw off its Mongol
allegiance and refused to pay tribute any longer (1480). The successors of
Constantine no longer reigned in Constantinople and Ivan took possession of the
Byzantine double-headed eagle for his arms. He claimed to be the heir to
Byzantium because of his marriage (1472) with Zoe Pahaeologus of the imperial
line. This ambitious grand dukedom of Moscow assailed and subjugated the ancient
Northman trading republic of Novgorod to the north and so the foundations of the
modern Russian mercantile life of the Baltic established. Ivan III did not,
however, carry his claim to be the heir of the Christian rulers of
Constantinople to the extent of assuming the imperial title. This step was taken
by his grandson, Ivan IV (Ivan the Terrible, because of his insane cruelties;
1533-1584). Although the ruler of Moscow thus came to be called Tsar (Cæsars)
his tradition was in many respects Tartar rather than European; he was
autocratic after the unlimited Asiatic pattern, and the form of Christianity he
affected was the Eastern, court-ruled, «orthodox» form, which had reached Russia
long before the Mongol conquest, by means of Bulgarian missionaries from
Constantinople.

To the west of the domains of Kipchak, outside the range of Mongol rule, a
second centre of Slav consolidation had been set up during the tenth and
eleventh centuries in Poland. The Mongol wave had washed over Poland, but had
never subjugated it. Poland was not «orthodox», but Roman Catholic in religion;
it used the Latin alphabet instead of the strange Russian letters, and its
monarch never assumed an absolute independence of the Emperor. Poland was in
fact in its origins an outlying part of Christendom and of the Holy Empire;
Russia never was anything of the sort.

