
33.5.4 Timurlane
========================================================================
.. _Figure 692:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0692.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0692.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 692

    Figure 692: Map â€” The Empire of Timurlane

The nature and development of the empire of the Ilkhans in Persia,
Mesopotamia, and Syria is perhaps the most interesting of all the stories of
these Mongol powers, because in this region nomadism really did attempt, and
really did to a very considerable degree succeed in its attempt to stamp a
settled civilized system out of existence. When Jengis Kahn first invaded China,
we are told that there was a serious discussion among the Mongol chiefs whether
all the towns and settled populations should not be destroyed. To these simple
practitioners of the open-air life the settled populations seemed corrupt,
crowded, vicious, effeminate, dangerous, and incomprehensible; a detestable
human efflorescence upon what would otherwise have been good pasture. They had
no use whatever for the towns. The early Franks and the Anglo-Saxon conquerors
of South Britain seem to have had much the same feeling towards townsmen. But it
was only under Hulagu in Mesopotamia that these ideas, seem to have been
embodied in a deliberate policy. The Mongols here did not only burn and
massacre; they destroyed the irrigation system that had endured for at least
eight thousand years, and with that the mother civilization of all the Western
world came to an end. Since the days of the priest-kings of Sumeria there had
been a continuous cultivation in these fertile regions, an accumulation of
tradition, a great population, a succession of busy cities, Eridu, Nippur,
Babylon, Nineveh, Ctesiphon, Bagdad. Now the fertility ceased. Mesopotamia
became a land of ruins and desolation, through which great waters ran to waste,
or overflowed their banks to make malarious swamps. Later, on Mosul and Bagdad
revived, feebly as second-rate towns. . . .

But for the defeat and death of Hulagu's general Kitboga in Palestine (1260),
the same fate might have overtaken Egypt. But Egypt was now a Turkish sultanate;
it was dominated by a body of soldiers, the Mamelukes, whose ranks, like those
of their imitators, the Janissaries of the Ottoman Empire, were recruited and
kept vigorous by the purchase and training of boy slaves. A capable Sultan such
would obey; a weak or evil one they would replace. Under this ascendancy Egypt
remained an independent power until 1517, when it fell to the Ottoman Turks.

The first destructive vigor of Hulagu's Mongols soon subsided, but in the
fifteenth century a last tornado of nomadism arose in Western Turkestan under
the leadership of a certain Timur the Lime, or Timurlane. He was descended in
the female line from Jengis Khan. He established himself in Samarkand, and
spread his authority over Kipchak (Turkestan to South Russia), Siberia, and
southward as far as the Indus. He assumed the title of Great Khan in 1369. He
was a nomad of the savage school, and he created an empire of desolation from
North India to Syria. Pyramids of skulls were his particular architectural
fancy; after the storming of Ispahan he made one of 70,000. His ambition was to
restore the empire of Jengis Kahn as he conceived it, a project in which he
completely failed. He spread destruction far and wide; the Ottoman Turks -it was
before the taking of Constantinople and their days of greatness-and Egypt paid
him tribute; the Punjab he devastated; and Delhi surrendered to him. After Delhi
had surrendered, however, he made a frightful massacre of its inhabitants. At
the time of his death (1405) very little remained to witness to his power but a
name of horror, ruins and desolated countries, and a shrunken and impoverished
domain in Persia.

The dynasty founded by Timur in Persia was extinguished by another Turkoman
horde fifty years later.

