
33.5.5 The Mongol Empire of India
========================================================================
In 1505 a small Turkoman chieftain, Baber, a descendant of Timur and
therefore of Jengis, was forced after some years of warfare and some temporary
successes—for a time he held Satmarkand—to fly with a few followers over the
Hindu Kush to Afghanistan. There his band increased, and he made himself master
of Cabul. He assembled an army, accumulated guns, and then laid claim to the
Punjab, because Timur had conquered it a hundred and seven years before. He
pushed his successes beyond the Punjab. India was in a state of division, and
quite ready to welcome any capable invader who promised peace and order. After
various fluctuations of fortune Baber met the Sultan of Delhi at Panipat(1525),
ten miles north of that town, and though he had but 25,000 men, provided,
however, with guns, against a thousand elephants and four times as many men-the
numbers, by the by, are his own estimate he gained a complete victory. He ceased
to call himself King of Cabul, and assumed the title of Emperor of Hindustan.
«This», he wrote, «is quite a different world from our countries». It was finer,
more fertile, and altogether richer. He conquered as far as Bengal, but his
untimely death in 1930 checked the tide of Mongol conquest for a quarter of a
century, and it was only after the accession of his grandson Akbar that it
flowed again. Akbar subjugated all India as far as Berar, and his great-grandson
Aurungzeb(1658-1707) was practically master of the entire peninsula. This great
dynasty of Baber(1526-1530), Humayun (1530-1556), Akbar (1556-1605), Jehangir
(1605-1628), Shah Jehan (1628-1658), and Aurungzeb (1658-1707), in which son
succeeded father for six generations, this «Mogul (Mongol) dynasty»,\ [#fn2]_  marks
the most splendid age that had hitherto dawned upon India. Akbar, next perhaps
to Asoka, was one of the greatest of Indian monarchs, and one of the few royal
figures that approach the stature of great men.

To Akbar it is necessary to give the same distinctive attention that we have
shown to Charlemagne or Constantine the Great. He is one of the hinges of
history. Much of his work of consolidation and organization in India survives to
this day.

It was taken over and continued by the British when they became the
successors of the Mogul emperors. The British monarch, indeed, now uses as his
Indian title the title of the Mogul emperors, *Kaisar-i-Hind.* All the
other great administrations of the descendants of Jengis Khan, in Russia,
throughout Western and Central Asia and in China, have long since dissolved away
and given place to other forms of government. Their governments were indeed
little more than taxing governments; a system of revenue collecting to feed the
central establishment of the ruler, like the Golden Horde in South Russia or the
imperial city at Karakorum or Pekin. The life and ideas of the people they left
alone, careless bow they lived-so long as they paid. So it was that after
centuries of subjugation, a Christian Moscow and Kieff, a Shiite Persia, and a
thoroughly Chinese China rose again from their Mongol submergence. But Akbar
made a new India. He gave the princes and ruling classes of India some inklings
at least of a common interest. If India is now anything more than a sort of
ragbag of incoherent states and races, a prey to every casual raider from the
north, it is very largely due to him.

His distinctive quality was his openness of mind. He set himself to make
every sort of able man in India, whatever his race or religion, available for
the public work of Indian life. His instinct was the true statesman's instinct
for synthesis. His empire was to be neither a Moslem nor a Mongol one, nor was
it to be Rajput or Aryan, or Dravidian, or Hindu, or high or low caste; it was
to be Indian. «During the years of his training he enjoyed many opportunities of
noting the good qualities, the fidelity, the devotion, often the nobility of
soul, of those Hindu princes, whom, because they were followers of Brahma, his
Moslem courtiers devoted mentally to eternal torments. He noted that these men,
and 'Men who thought like them, constituted the vast majority of his subjects.
He noted, further, of many of them, and those the most trustworthy, that though
they had apparently much to gain from a worldly point of view by embracing the
religion of the court, they held fast to their own. His reflective mind,
therefore, was unwilling from the outset to accept the theory that because he,
the conqueror, the ruler, happened to be born a Muhammadan, therefore,
Muhammadanism was true for all mankind. Gradually his thoughts found words in
the utterance: 'Why should I claim to guide men before I myself am guided?' and,
as he listened to other doctrines and other creeds, his honest doubts became
confirmed, and, noting daily the bitter narrowness of sectarianism, no matter of
what form of religion, he became more and more wedded to the principle of
toleration for all».

«The son of a fugitive emperor», says Dr. Emil Schmit, «born in the desert,
brought up in nominal confinement, he had known the bitter side of life from his
youth up. Fortune had given him a powerful frame, which he trained to support
the extremities of exertion. Physical exercise was with him a passion; he was
devoted to the chase and especially to the fierce excitement of catching the
wild horse or elephant or slaying the dangerous tiger. On one occasion, when it
was necessary to dissuade the Raja of Jodhpore to abandon his intention of
forcing the widow of his deceased son to mount the funeral pyre, Akbar rode two
hundred and twenty miles in two days. In battle he displayed the utmost bravery.
He led his troops in person during the dangerous part of a campaign, leaving to
his generals the lighter task of finishing the war. In every victory he
displayed humanity to the conquered, and decisively opposed any exhibition of
cruelty. Free from all those prejudices which separate society and create
dissension, tolerant to men of other beliefs, impartial to men of other races,
whether Hindu or Dravidian, he was a man obviously marked out to weld the
conflicting elements of his kingdom into a strong and prosperous whole.

«In all seriousness he devoted himself to the work of peace. Moderate in all
pleasures, needing but little sleep and accustomed to divide his time with the
utmost accuracy, he found leisure to devote himself to science and art after the
completion of his State duties. The famous personages and scholars who adorned
the capital he had built for himself at Fatepur-Sikri were at the same time his
friends; every Thursday evening a circle of these was collected for intellectual
conversation and philosophical discussion. His closest friends were two highly
talented brothers, Faizi and Abul Fazl, the sons of a learned free-thinker. The
elder of these was a famous scholar in Hindu literature; with his help, and
under his direction, Akbar had the most important of the Sanskrit works
translated into Persian. Fazl, on the other hand, who was an especially close
friend of Akbar, was a general, a statesman, and an organizer, and to his
activity Akbar's kingdom chiefly owed the solidarity of its internal
organization».\ [#fn3]_ 

(Such was the quality of the circle that used to meet in the palaces of
Fatehpur-Sikri, buildings which still stand in the Indian sunlight—but empty now
and desolate. Fatehpur-Sikri, like the city of Ambar, is now a dead city. A few
years ago the child of a British official was killed by a panther in one of its
silent streets.)

All this that we have quoted reveals a pre-eminent monarch. But Akbar, like
all men, great or petty, lived within the limitations of his period and its
circle of ideas. And a Turkoman, ruling in India, was necessarily ignorant of
much that Europe had been painfully learning for a thousand years. He knew
nothing of the growth of a popular consciousness in Europe, and little or
nothing of the wide educational possibilities that the church had been working
out in the West. His upbringing in Islam and his native genius made it plain to
him that a great nation in India could only be cemented by common ideas upon a
religious basis, but the knowledge of how such a solidarity could be created and
sustained by universal schools, cheap books, and a university system at once
organized and free to think, to which the modern state is still feeling its way,
was as impossible to him as a knowledge of steamboats or aeroplanes. The form of
Islam he knew best was the narrow and fiercely intolerant form of the Turkish
Sunnites. The Moslems were only a minority of the population. The problem he
faced was indeed very parallel to the problem of Constantine the Great. But it
had peculiar difficulties of its own. He never got beyond an attempt to adapt
Islam to a wider appeal by substituting for «There is one God, and Muhammad is
his prophet», the declaration, «There is one God, and the Emperor is his
vice-regent». This he thought might form a common plat form for every variety of
faith in India, that kaleidoscope of religions. With this faith he associated a
simple ritual borrowed from the Persian Zoroastrians (the Parsees) who still
survived, and survive today, in India. This now state religion, however, died
with him, because it had no roots in the minds of the people about him.

The essential factor in the organization of a living state, the world is
coming to realize, is the organization of an education.

This Akbar never understood. And he had no class of men available who would
suggest such an idea to him or help him to carry it out. The Moslem teachers in
India were not so much teachers as conservators of an intense bigotry; they did
not want a common mind in India, but only a common intolerance in Islam. The
Brahmins, who had the monopoly of teaching among the Hindus, had all the conceit
and slackness of hereditary privilege. Yet though Akbar made no general
educational scheme for India, he set up a number of Moslem, and Hindu schools.
He knew less and he did more for India in these matters than the British who
succeeded him. Some of the British viceroys have aped his magnificence, his
costly tents and awnings, his palatial buildings and his elephants of state, but
none have gone far enough beyond the political outlook of this mediaeval
Turkoman to attempt that popular education which is an absolute necessity to
India before she can play her fitting part in the commonweal of mankind.

.. [#fn2] "Mogul" is our rendering of the Arabic spelling Mughal, which itself was a corruption of Mongol, the Arabic alphabet having no symbol for ng. —H. H. J.

.. [#fn3] Dr. Schmit in Helmholt’s :t:`History of the World`.
