
26.5 Cato the Elder and the Spirit of Cato
========================================================================
For twenty-two years there was peace between Rome and
Carthage. It was peace without prosperity. Both combatants were suffering from
the want and disorganization that follow naturally and necessarily upon all
great wars. The territories of Carthage seethed with violent disorder; the
returning soldiers could not get their pay, and mutinied and looted; the land
went uncultivated. We read of horrible cruelties in the suppression of these
troubles by Hamilcar, the Carthaginian general; of men being crucified by the
thousand. Sardinia and Corsica revolted. The «peace of Italy» was scarcely
happier. The Gauls rose and marched south; they were defeated, and 40,000 of
them killed at Telamon. It is manifest that Italy was incomplete until it
reached the Alps. Roman colonies were planted in the valley of the Po, and the
great northward artery, the Via Flaminia, was begun. But it shows the moral and
intellectual degradation of this post-war period that when the Gauls were
threatening Rome, human sacrifices were proposed and carried out. The old
Carthaginian sea law was broken up-it may have been selfish and monopolistic,
but it was at least orderly the Adriatic swarmed with Illyrian pirates, and as
the result of a quarrel arising out of this state of affairs, Illyria, after
two wars, had to be annexed as a second «province». By sending expeditions to
annex Sardinia and Corsica, which were Carthaginian provinces in revolt, the
Romans prepared the way for the Second Punic War.

.. _Figure 404:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0404.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0404.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 404

    Figure 404: Roman As

    Bronze, 4th century B.C.

The First Punic War had tested and demonstrated the
relative strength of Rome and Carthage. With a little more wisdom on either
side, with a little more magnanimity on the part of Rome, there need never have
been a renewal of the struggle. But Rome was an ungracious conqueror. She
seized Corsica and Sardinia on no just grounds, she increased the indemnity by
1,200 talents, she set a limit, the Ebro, to Carthaginian developments in
Spain. There was a strong party in Carthage, led by Hanno, for the propitiation
of Rome; but it was natural that many Carthaginians should come to regard their
national adversary with a despairing hatred.

Hatred is one of the passions that can master a life, and
there is a type of temperament very prone to it, ready to see life in terms of
vindictive melodrama, ready to find stimulus and satisfaction in frightful
demonstrations of «justice» and revenge. The fears and jealousies of the
squatting-place and the cave still bear their dark blossoms in our lives; we
are not four hundred generations yet from the old Stone Age. Great wars, as all
Europe knows, give this «hating» temperament the utmost scope, and the greed
and pride and cruelty that the First Punic War had released were now producing
a rich crop of anti-foreign monomania. The outstanding figure upon the Aide of
Carthage was a great general and administrator, Hamilcar Barca, who now set
himself to circumvent and shatter Rome. He was the father-in-law of Hasdrubal
and the father of a boy Hannibal, destined to be the most dreaded enemy that
ever seared the Roman Senate. The most obvious course before Carthage was the
reconstruction of its fleet and naval administration, and the recovery of sea
power, but this, it would seem, Hamilcar could not effect. As an alternative he
resolved to organize Spain as the base of a land attack upon Italy. He went to
Spain as governor in 236 B.C., and Hannibal related afterwards that his father
then-he was a boy of eleven made him vow deathless hostility to the Roman
power.

This quasi-insane concentration of the gifts and lives of
the Barca family upon revenge is but one instance of the narrowing and
embitterment of life that the stresses and universal sense of insecurity of
this great struggle produced in the minds of men. A quarter of a century of war
had left the whole western world miserable and harsh. While the eleven-year-old
Hannibal was taking his vow of undying hatred, there was running about a
farmhouse of Tusculum a small but probably very disagreeable child of two named
Marcus Porcius Cato. This boy, lived to be eighty-five years old, and his
ruling passion seems to have been hatred for any human happiness but his own.
He was a good soldier, and had a successful political career. He held a command
in Spain, and distinguished himself by his cruelties. He posed as a champion of
religion and public morality and under this convenient cloak carried on a
lifelong war against everything that was young, gracious, or pleasant. Whoever
roused his jealousy incurred his moral disapproval. He was energetic in the
support and administration of all laws against dress, against the personal
adornment of women, against entertainments and free discussion. He was so
fortunate as to be made censor, which gave him great power over the private
lives of public people. He was thus able to ruin public opponents through
private scandals. He expelled Manlius from the Senate for giving his wife a
kiss in the daytime in the sight of their daughter. He persecuted Greek
literature, about which, until late in life, he was totally ignorant. Then He
read and admired Demosthenes. He wrote in Latin upon agriculture and the
ancient and lost virtues of Rome. From these writings much light is thrown upon
his qualities. One of his maxims was that when a slave was not sleeping he
should be working. Another was that old oxen and slaves should be sold off. He
left the war horse that had carried him through his Spanish campaigns behind
him when he returned to Italy in order to save freight. He hated other people's
gardens, and cut off the supply of water for garden use in Rome. After
entertaining company, when dinner was over he would go out to correct any
negligence in the service with a leather thong. He admired his own virtues very
greatly, and insisted upon them in his writings. There was a battle at
Thermopylae against Antiochus the Great, of which he wrote, «those who saw him
charging the enemy, routing and pursuing them, declared that Cato owed less to
the people of Rome than the people of Rome owed to Cato».\ [#fn5]_  In his old age
Cato became lascivious and misconducted himself with a woman slave. Finally,
when his son protested against this disorder of their joint household, he
married a young wife, the daughter of his secretary, who was not in a position
to refuse his offer. (What became of the woman slave is not told. Probably he
sold her.) This compendium of all the old Roman virtues died at an advanced
age, respected and feared. Almost his last public act was to urge on the Third
Punic War and the final destruction of Carthage. He had gone to Carthage as a
commissioner to settle certain differences between Carthage and Numidia, and he
had been shocked and horrified to find some evidences of prosperity and even of
happiness in that country.

From the time of that visit onward. Cato concluded every
speech he made in the Senate by croaking out 
*«Delenda est Carthago»* («Carthage must be destroyed»).

Such was the type of man that rose to prominence in Rome
during the Punic struggle, such was the protagonist of Hannibal and the
Carthaginian *revanche,* and by him and
by Hannibal we may judge the tone and quality of the age.

The two great western powers, and Rome perhaps more than
Carthage, were strained mentally and morally by the stresses of the First War.
The evil side of life was uppermost. The history of the Second and Third Punic
Wars (219 to 201 and 149 to 146 B.C.), it is plain, is not the history of
perfectly sane peoples. It is nonsense for historians to write of the
«political instincts» of the Romans or Carthaginians. Quite other instincts
were loose. The red eyes of the ancestral ape had come back into the world. It
was a time when reasonable men were howled down or murdered; the true spirit of
the age is shown in the eager examination for signs and portents of the still
quivering livers of those human victims who were sacrificed in Rome during the
panic before the battle of Telamon. The western world was indeed black with
homicidal monomania, Two great peoples, both very necessary to the world's
development, fell foul of one another, and at last Rome succeeded in murdering
Carthage.

.. [#fn5] Plutarch, :t:`Life of Cato`.
