
26.9 Comparison of the Roman Republic with a Modern State
========================================================================
The history of the Roman Republic thus far, is in many
respects much more modern in flavour, especially to the American or Western
European reader, than anything that has preceded it. For the first time we have
something like a self-governing «nation», something larger than a mere city-state,
seeking to control its own destinies. For the first time we have a wide
countryside under one conception of law. We get in the Senate and the popular
assembly a conflict of groups and personalities, an argumentative process of
control, far more stable and enduring than any autocracy can be, and far more
flexible and adaptable than any priesthood. For the first time also we
encounter social conflicts, comparable to our own. Money has superseded barter,
and financial capital has become fluid and free; not perhaps so fluid and free
as it is today, but much more so than it had ever been before. The Punic Wars
were wars of peoples, such as were no other wars we have yet recorded.
Indubitably the broad lines of our present world, the main ideas, the chief
oppositions, were appearing in those days.

But, as we have already pointed out, certain of the
elementary facilities and some of the current political ideas of our time were
still wanting in the Rome of the Punic Wars. There were no newspapers,\ [#fn6]_  and
there was practically no use of elected representatives in the popular
assemblies. And another deficiency, very understandable to us nowadays, but
quite beyond the scope of anyone then, was the absence of any general
elementary political education at all. The plebeians of Rome had shown some
glimmering of the idea that without knowledge votes cannot make men free, when
they had insisted upon the publication of the law of the Twelve Tables; but
they had never been able, it was beyond the possibilities of the time to
imagine any further extension of knowledge to the bulk of the people. It is
only nowadays that men are beginning to understand fully the political
significance of the maxim that «knowledge is power». Two British Trade Unions,
for example, have recently set up a Labour College to meet the special needs of
able working-men in history, political and social science, and the like. But
education in republican Rome was the freak of the individual parent, and the
privilege of wealth and leisure. It was mainly in the hands of Greeks, who were
in many cases slaves. There was a thin small stream of very fine learning and
very fine thinking up to the first century of the monarchy, let Lucretius and
Cicero witness, but it did not spread into the mass of the people. The ordinary
Roman was not only blankly ignorant of the history of mankind, but also of the
conditions of foreign peoples; he had no knowledge of economic laws nor of social
possibilities. Even his own interests he did not clearly understand.

Of course, in the little city states of Greece and in that
early Roman state of four hundred square miles, men acquired by talk and
observation a sufficient knowledge for the ordinary duties of citizenship, but
by the beginning of the Punic Wars the business was already too big and
complicated for illiterate men. Yet nobody seems to have observed the gap that
was opening between the citizen and his state, and so there is no record at all
of any attempt to enlarge the citizen by instruction to meet his enlarged
duties.

From the second century B.C. and onward everyone is
remarking upon the ignorance of the common citizen and his lack of political
wisdom, everything is suffering from the lack of political solidarity due to
this ignorance but no one goes on to what we should now consider the inevitable
corollary, no one proposes to destroy the ignorance complained of. There
existed no means whatever for the instruction of the masses of the people in a
common political and social ideal. It was only with the development of the
great propagandist religions in the Roman world, of which Christianity was the
chief and the survivor, that the possibility of such a systematic instruction
of great masses of people became apparent in the world. That very great
political genius, the Emperor Constantine the Great, six centuries later, was
the first to apprehend and to attempt to use this possibility for the
preservation and the mental and moral knitting-together of the world community
over which be ruled.

.. _Figure 421:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0421.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0421.png
    :figclass: full-figure
    :width: 600px
    :alt: Figure 421

    Figure 421: Gladiators

    From a wall-painting at Pompeii

But it is not only in these deficiencies of news and of
education and of the expedient of representative government that this political
system of Rome differed from our own. True, it was far more like a modern
civilized state than any other state we have considered hitherto, but in some
matters it was strangely primordial and «sub-civilized». Every now and then,
the reader of Roman history, reading it in terms of debates and measures,
policies and campaigns, capital and labour, comes upon something that gives him
much the same shock he would feel if he went down to an unknown caller in his
house and extended his hand to meet the misshapen hairy paw 
of *Homo Neanderthalensis* and looked up
to see a chinless, bestial face. We have noted the occurrence of human
sacrifice in the third century B.C., and much that we learn of the religion of
republican Rome carries us far back beyond the days of decent gods, to the age
of shamanism and magic. We talk of a legislative gathering, and the mind flies
to Westminster; but how should we feel if we went to see the beginning of a
session of the House of Lords, and discovered the Lord Chancellor, with bloody
fingers, portentously fiddling about among the entrails of a newly killed
sheep? The mind would recoil from Westminster to the customs of Benin and the
slavery of Rome was a savage slavery, altogether viler than the slavery of
Babylon. We have had a glimpse of the virtuous Cato among his slaves in the
second century B.C. Moreover, in the third Century B.C., when King Asoka was
ruling India in light and gentleness, the Romans were reviving an Etruscan
sport, the setting on of slaves to fight for their lives. One is reminded of
West Africa again in the origin of this amusement; it grew out of the
prehistoric custom of a massacre of captives at the burial of a chief. There
was a religious touch about this sport; the slaves with hooks, who dragged the
dead bodies out of the arena, wore masks to represent the infernal ferryman-god,
Charon. In 264 B.C., the very year in which Asoka began to reign and the First
Punic War began, the first recorded gladiatorial combat took place in the forum
at Rome, to celebrate the funeral of a member of the old Roman family of
Brutus. This was a modest display of three couples, but soon gladiators were,
fighting by the hundred. The taste for these combats grew rapidly, and the wars
supplied an abundance of captives. The old Roman moralists, who were so severe
upon kissing and women's ornaments and Greek philosophy, had nothing but good
to say for this new development. So long as pain was inflicted, Roman morality,
it would seem, was satisfied.

If republican Rome was the first of modern self-governing
national communities, she was certainly the «Neanderthal» form of them.

In the course of the next two or three centuries the
gladiatorial shows of Rome grew to immense proportions. To begin with, while
wars were frequent, the gladiators were prisoners of war. They came with their
characteristic national weapons, tattooed Britons, Moors, Scythians, negroes,
and the like, and there was perhaps some military value in these exhibitions.
Then criminals of the lower classes condemned to death were also used. The
ancient world did not understand that a criminal condemned to death still has
rights, and at any rate the use of a criminal as a gladiator was not so bad as
his use as «material» for the vivisectors of the Museum at Alexandria. But as
the profits of this sort of show business grew and the demand for victims
increased, ordinary slaves were sold to the trainers of gladiators, and any
slave who had aroused his owner's spite, might find himself in an establishment
for letting out gladiators. And dissipated young men who had squandered their
property, and lads of spirit would go voluntarily into the trade for a stated
time, trusting to their prowess to survive. As the business developed, a new
use was found for gladiators as armed retainers; rich men would buy a band, and
employ it as a bodyguard or hire it out for profit at the shows. The
festivities of a show began with a ceremonial procession (pompa) and a sham
fight (praelusio). The real fighting was heralded by trumpets. Gladiators who
objected to fight for any reason were driven on by whips and hot irons. A wounded
man would sometimes call for pity by holding up his forefinger. The spectators
would then either wave their handkerchiefs in token of mercy, or condemn him to
death by holding out their clenched fists with the thumbs down.\ [#fn7]_  The slain
and nearly dead were dragged out to a particular place, the spoliarium, where
they were stripped of their arms and possessions, and those who had not already
expired were killed.

This organization of murder as a sport and show serves to
measure the great gap in moral standards between the Roman community and our
own. No doubt cruelties and outrages upon human dignity as monstrous as this
still go on in the world, but they do not go on in the name of the law and
without a single dissentient voice. For it is true that until the time of
Seneca (first century A.D.) there is no record of any plain protest against
this business. The conscience of mankind was, weaker and less intelligent then
than now.

Presently a new power was to come into the human conscience
through the spread of Christianity. The spirit of Jesus in Christianity became
the great antagonist in the later Roman state of these cruel shows and of
slavery, and as Christianity spread, these two evil things dwindled and
disappeared.\ [#fn8]_ 

.. [#fn6] Julius Caesar (60 B.C.) caused the proceedings of the Senate to be published by having them written up upon bulletin boards, in albo (upon the white). It had been the custom to publish the annual edict of the praetor in this fashion. There were professional letter-writers who sent news by special courier to rich country correspondents, and these would copy down the stuff upon the Album (white board). Cicero, while he was governor in Cilicia, got the current news from such a professional correspondent. He complains in one letter that it was not what he wanted; the expert was too full of the chariot races and other sporting intelligence, and failed to give any view of the political situation. Obviously this news-letter system was available only for public men in prosperous circumstances.

.. [#fn7] Authorities differ here. Mayor says thumbs up (to the breast) meant death and thumbs down meant "Lower that sword." The popular persuasion is that thumbs down meant death.

.. [#fn8] A little more needs to be said upon the subject. The Greeks cited gladiatorial shows as reason for regarding the Romans as Barbaroi, and there were riots when some Roman proconsul tried to introduce them in Corinth. Among Romans, the better people evidently disliked them, but as a sort of shyness prevented them from frankly denouncing them as cruel. For instance, Didero, when he had to attend the Circus, took his tablets and his secretary with him, and didn’t look. He expresses particular disgust at the killing of an elephant; and somebody in Tacitus (Drusus, Ann. 1.76) was unpopular because he was too fond of gladiatorial bloodshed—’ quamquam vili sanguine nimis gaudens’ (‘rejoicing too much in blood, worthless blood though it was’). The games were unhesitatingly condemned by Greek philosophy, and at different times two cynics and one Christian gave their lives in the arena, protesting against them, before they were abolished.

    I do not think Christianity had any such relation to slavery as is here stated. St. Paul’s actions in sending back a slave to his master, and his injunction, ‘Slaves, obey your masters,’ were regularly quoted on the pro-slavery side, down to the nineteenth century; on the other hand, both the popular philosophies and the Mystery religions were against slavery in their whole tendency, and Christianity of course in time became the chief representative of these movements. Probably the best test is the number of slaves who occupied posts of honour in the religious and philosophic systems, like Epicetus, for instance, or the many saves who hold offices in the Mithraic Inscriptions. I do not happen to know if any slaves were made Christian bishops, but by analogy I should think it likely that some were. In all the Mystery religions, as soon as you entered the community, and had communion with God, earthly distinctions shrivelled away. —G. M.
