20.1 The Spreading of the Aryan Speakers
================================================================
.. _Figure 237:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0237.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0237.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 237

    Figure 237: Map — Aryan-speaking Peoples 1000-500 B.C.

We have spoken of the Aryan language as probably arising in the region of the
Danube and South Russia and spreading from that region of origin. We say
"probably", because it is by no means certainly proved that that was the
centre; there have been vast discussions upon this point and wide divergences
of opinion. We give the prevalent view. It was originally the language of a
group of peoples of the Nordic race. As it spread widely, Aryan began to
differentiate into a number of subordinate languages. To the west and south
it encountered the Basque language, which was then widely spread in Spain,
and also possibly various other Mediterranean languages.

Before the spreading of the Aryans from their lands of origin southward and
westward, the Iberian race was distributed over Great Britain, Ireland,
France, Spain, north Africa, south Italy, and, in a more civilized state,
Greece and Asia Minor. It was closely related to the Egyptian. To judge by
its European vestiges it was a rather small human type, generally with an
oval face and a long head. It buried its chiefs and important people in
megalithic chambers — i.e. made of big stones-covered over by great mounds of
earth; and these mounds of earth, being much longer than they are broad, are
spoken of as the long barrows. These people sheltered at times in eaves, and
also buried some of their dead therein; and from the traces of charred,
broken, and cut human bones, including the bones of children, it is inferred
that they were cannibals.

These short dark Iberian tribes (and the Basques also if they were a
different race) were thrust back westward, and conquered and enslaved by
slowly advancing waves of the taller and fairer Aryan-speaking people, coming
southward and westward through Central Europe, who are spoken of as the
Kelts. Only the Basque resisted the conquering Aryan speech. Gradually these
Keltic-speakers made their way to the Atlantic, and all that now remains of
the Iberians is mixed into the Keltic population. How far the Keltic invasion
affected the Irish population is a matter of debate at the present time; in
that island the Kelts may have been a mere caste of conquerors who imposed
their language on a larger subject population. It is even doubtful if the
north of England is more Aryan than pre-Keltic in blood. There is a sort of
short dark Welshman, and certain types of Irishmen, who are Iberians by race.
The modern Portuguese are also largely of Iberian blood.

The Kelts spoke a language, Keltic,\ [#fn1]_ which was also in its turn to
differentiate into the language of Gaul, Welsh, Breton, Scotch and Irish
Gaelic, and other tongues. They buried the ashes of their chiefs and
important people in round barrows. While these Nordic Kelts were spreading
westward, other Nordic Aryan peoples were pressing down upon the dark white
Mediterranean race in the Italian and Greek peninsulas, and developing the
Latin and Greek groups of tongues. Certain other Aryan tribes were drifting
towards the Baltic and across into Scandinavia, speaking varieties of the
Aryan which became ancient Norse-the parent of Swedish, Danish, Norwegian,
and Icelandic — Gothic, and Low and High German.

While the primitive Aryan speech was thus spreading and breaking up into
daughter languages to the west, it was also spreading and breaking up to the
east. North of the Carpathians and the Black Sea, Aryan-speaking tribes were
increasing and spreading and using a distinctive dialect called Slavonian,
from which came Russian, Serbian, Polish, Bulgarian, and other tongues; other
variations of Aryan distributed over Asia Minor and Persia were also being
individualized as Armenian and Indo-Iranian, the parent of Sanskrit and
Persian. In this book we have used the word Aryan for all this family of
languages, but the term Indo-European is some times used for the entire
family, and "Aryan" itself restricted, in a narrower sense to the Indo-
Iranian speech.

This Indo-Iranian speech was destined to split later into a number of
languages, including Persian and Sanskrit, the latter being the language of
certain tribes of fair-complexioned Aryan speakers who pushed eastward, into
India somewhere between 3,000 and 1,000 B.C. and conquered dark Dravidian
peoples who were then in possession of that land.

From their original range of wandering, other Aryan tribes spread to the
north as well as to the south of the Black Sea, and ultimately, as these seas
shrank and made way for them, to the north and east of the Caspian, and so
began to come into conflict with and mix also with Mongolian peoples of the
Ural-Altaic linguistic group the horse-keeping people of the grassy steppes
of Central Asia. From these Mongolian races the Aryans seem to have acquired
the use of the horse for riding and warfare. There were three or four
prehistoric varieties or sub-species of horse in Europe and Asia, but it was
the steppe or semi-desert lands that first gave horses of a build adapted to
other than food uses.\ [#fn2]_ All these peoples, it must be understood; shifted
their ground rapidly, a succession of bad seasons might drive them many
hundreds of miles, and it is only in a very rough and provisional manner that
their "beats" can now be indicated. Every summer they went north, every
winter they swung south again. This annual swing covered sometimes hundreds
of miles. On our maps, for the sake of simplicity, we represent the shifting
of nomadic peoples by a straight line; but really they moved in annual
swings, as the broom of a servant who is sweeping out a passage swishes from
side to side as she advances. Spreading round the north of the Black Sea, and
probably to the north of the Caspian, from the range of the original Teutonic
tribes of Central and Northcentral Europe to the Iranian peoples who became
the Medes and Persians and (Aryan) Hindus, were the grazing lands of a
confusion of tribes, about whom it is truer to be vague than precise, such as
the Cimmerians, the Sarmatians, and those Scythians who, together with the
Medes and Persians, came into effective contact with the Assyrian Empire by
1,000 B.C. or earlier.

East and south of the Black Sea, between, the Danube and the Medes and
Persians, and to the north of the Semitic and Mediterranean peoples of the
sea-coasts and peninsulas, ranged another series of equally ill-defined Aryan
tribes, moving easily from place to place and intermixing freely-to the great
confusion of historians. They seem, for instance, to have broken up and
assimilated the Hittite civilization, which was probably pro-Aryan in its
origin. These latter Aryans were, perhaps, not so far advanced along the
nomadic line as the Scythians of the great plains.

.. [#fn1] "The Keltic group of languages, of which it has been said that they combined an Aryan vocabulary with a Berber (or Iberian) grammar." —Sir Harry Johnston.

.. [#fn2] Roger Pocock's :t:`Horses` is a good and readable book on these questions.

