
20.2 Primitive Aryan Life
================================================================
What sort of life did these prehistoric Aryans lead, these Nordic Aryans who
were the chief ancestors of most Europeans and most white Americans and
European colonists of today, as well as of the Armenians,\ [#fn3]_ Persians,
and high-caste Hindus?

In answering that question in addition to the dug-up remains and vestiges
upon which we have had to rely in the case of the predecessors of the Aryans,
we have a new source of knowledge. We have language. By careful study of the
Aryan languages it has been found possible to deduce a number of conclusions
about the life of these Aryan peoples 5,000 or 4,000 years ago. All these
languages have a common resemblance, as each, as we have already explained,
rings the changes upon a number of common roots. When we find the same root
word running through all or most of these tongues, it seems reasonable to
conclude that the thing that root word signifies must have been known to the
common ancestors. Of course, if they have *exactly the same word* in their
languages, this may not be the case; it may be the new name of a new thing or
of a new idea that has spread over the world quite recently. "Gas", for
instance, is a word that was made by Van Helmont, a Dutch chemist, about
1625, and has spread into most civilized tongues, and "tobacco" again is an
American-Indian word which followed the introduction of smoking almost
everywhere. But if the same word turns up in a number of languages, and *if
it follows the characteristic modifications of each language*, we may feel
sure that it has been in that language, and a part of that language, since
the beginning, suffering the same changes with the rest of it. We know, for
example, that the words for wagon and wheel run in this fashion through the
Aryan tongues, and so we are able to conclude that the primitive Aryans, the
more purely Nordic Aryans, had, wagons, though it would seem from the absence
of any common roots for spokes, rim, or axle that their wheels were not
wheelwright's wheels with spokes, but made of the trunks of trees shaped out
with an axe between the ends.

These primitive wagons were drawn by oxen. The early Aryans did not ride or
drive horses; they had very little to do with horses. The Reindeer men were
a horse-people, but the Neolithic Aryans were a cow-people. They ate beef,
not horse; and after many ages they began this use of draught cattle. They
reckoned wealth by cows. They wandered, following pasture, and "trekking"
their goods, as the South African Boer's do, in ox-wagons, though of course
their wagons were much clumsier than any to be found in the world today. They
probably ranged over very wide areas. They were migratory, but not in the
strict sense of the word "nomadic"; they moved in a slower, clumsier fashion
than did the later, more specialized nomadic peoples. They were forest and
parkland people without horses. They were developing a migratory life out of
the more settled "forest clearing" life of the earlier Neolithic period.
Changes of climate which were replacing forest by pasture, and the accidental
burning of forests by fire, may have assisted this development.

We have already described the sort of home the primitive Aryan occupied and
his household life, so far as the remains of the Swiss pile dwellings enable
us to describe these things. Mostly his houses were of too flimsy a sort,
probably of wattle and mud, to have survived, and possibly he left them and
trekked, on for very slight reasons. The Aryan peoples burnt their dead, a
custom they still preserve in India, but their predecessors, the long-barrow
people, the Iberians, buried their dead in a sitting position. In some
ancient Aryan burial mounds (round barrows) the urns containing the ashes of
the departed are shaped like houses, and these represent rounded huts with
thatched roofs. (See :ref:`Figure 86`.)

The grazing of the primitive Aryan was far more important to him than his
agriculture. At, first he cultivated with a, rough wooden boo; then, after he
had found out the use of cattle for draught purposes, he began real ploughing
with oxen, using at first a suitably bent tree bough as his plough. His first
cultivation before that came about must have been rather in the form of
garden patches near the house buildings than of fields. Most of the land his
tribe occupied was common land on which the cattle grazed together.

He never used stone for building house walls until upon the very verge of
history. He used stone for hearths (e. g. at Glastonbury), and sometimes
stone sub-structures. He did, however, make a sort of stone house in the
centre of the great mounds in which he buried the ashes of his illustrious
dead. He may have learnt this custom from his Iberian neighbours, and.
predecessors. It was these dark whites of the heliolithic culture, and not
the primitive Aryans, who were responsible, for such temples as Stonehenge or
Carnac in Brittany.

These Aryans were congregated not in cities but in districts of pasturage, as
clans and tribal communities. They formed loose leagues of mutual help under
chosen leaders, they had centres where they could come together with their
cattle in times of danger, and they made camps with walls-of earth and
palisades, many of which are still to be traced in the history worn contours
of the European scenery. The leaders under whom men fought in war were often
the same men as the sacrificial purifiers who were their early priests.

The knowledge of bronze spread late in Europe. The Nordic European had been
making his slow advances age by age for 7,000 or 8,000 years before the
metals came. By that time his social life had developed so that there were
men of various occupations and men and women of different ranks in the
community. There were men who worked wood and leather, potters and carvers.
The women span and wove and embroidered. There were chiefs and families that
were, distinguished as leaderly and noble. The Aryan tribesman varied the
monotony of his herding and wandering, he consecrated undertakings and
celebrated triumphs, held funeral assemblies, and distinguished the
traditional seasons of the year, by *feasts.* His meats we have already
glanced at; he was an eager user of intoxicating drinks. He made these of
honey of barley, and, as the Aryan speaking tribes spread southward, of the
grape. And he got merry and drunken. Whether he, first used yeast to make his
bread light or to ferment his drink we do not know.

At his feasts there were individuals with a gift for "playing the fool", who
did so no doubt to win the laughter of their friends, but there was also
another sort of men, of great importance in their time, and still more
important to the historian, certain singers of songs and stories, the bards
or rhapsodists. These *bards* existed among all the Aryan-speaking peoples;
they were a consequence of and a further factor in that development of spoken
language which was the chief of all the human advances made in Neolithic
times. They chanted or recited stories of the past, or stories of the living
chief and his people; they told other stories that they invented; they
memorized jokes and catches. They found and seized upon and improved the
rhythms, rhymes, alliterations, and such-like possibilities latent in
language; they probably did much to elaborate and fix grammatical forms. They
were the first great artists of the ear, as the later Aurignacian rock
painters were the first great artists of the eye and hand. No doubt they used
much gesture; probably they learnt appropriate gestures when they learnt
their songs; but the order and sweetness and power of language was their
primary concern.

And they mark a new step forward in the power and range of the human mind.
They sustained and developed in men's minds a sense of a greater something
than themselves, the tribe, and of a life that extended back into the past.
They not only recalled old hatreds and battles, they recalled old alliances
and a common inheritance. The feats of dead heroes lived again. The Aryans
began to live in thought before they were born and after they were dead.

Like most human things, this bardic tradition grew first slowly and then more
rapidly. By the time bronze was coming into Europe there was not an Aryan
people that had not a profession and training of bards. In their hands
language became as beautiful as it is ever likely to be. These bards were
living books, man-histories, guardians and makers of a new and more powerful
tradition in human life. Every Aryan people had its long poetical records
thus handed down, its sagas (Teutonic), its epics (Greek) its vedas (Old
Sanskrit). The earliest Aryan people were essentially a people of the voice.
The recitation seems to have predominated even in those ceremonial and
dramatic dances and that ?dressing-up? which among most human races have also
served for the transmission of tradition.

At that time there was no writing, and when first the art of writing crept
into Europe, as we shall tell later, it must have seemed far too slow,
clumsy, and lifeless a method of record for men to trouble very much about
writing down these glowing and beautiful treasures of the memory. Writing was
at first kept for accounts and matters of fact. The, bards and rhapsodists
flourished for long after the introduction of writing. They survived, indeed,
in Europe as the minstrels into the Middle Ages.

Unhappily their tradition had not the fixity of a written record. They
amended and reconstructed, they had their fashions and their phases of
negligence. Accordingly we have now only the very much altered and revised
vestiges of that spoken literature of prehistoric times. One of the most
interesting and informing of these prehistoric compositions of the Aryans
survives in the Greek :t:`Iliad`. An early form of Iliad was probably recited by
1,000 B.C., but it was not written down until perhaps 700 or 600 B.C. Many
men must have bad to do with it as authors and improvers, but later Greek
tradition attributed it to a blind bard named Homer, to whom also is ascribed
the :t:`Odyssey`, a composition of a very different spirit and outlook. It is
possible that many of the Aryan bards were blind men. According to Professor
J. L. Myres their bards were blinded to prevent their straying from the
tribe. Mr. L. Lloyd has seen in Rhodesia the musician of a troupe of native
dancers who had been blinded by his chief for this very reason. The Slavs
called all bards *sliepac,* which was also their word for a blind man. The
original recited version of the :t:`Iliad` was older than that of the :t:`Odyssey`.
"The :t:`Iliad` as a complete poem is older than the :t:`Odyssey`, though the
material of the :t:`Odyssey`, being largely undatable folk-lore, is older than
any of the historical material in the :t:`Iliad`." Both epics were probably
written over and rewritten at a later date, in much the same manner that Lord
Tennyson, the poet laureate of Queen Victoria, in his :t:`Idylls of the King`,
wrote over the :t:`Morte d'Arthur` (which was itself a writing over by Sir
Thomas Malory, *circ.* 1450, of pre-existing legends), making the speeches
and sentiments and the characters more in accordance with those of his own
time. But the events of the :t:`Iliad` and the :t:`Odyssey`, the way of living they
describe, the spirit of the acts recorded, belong to the closing centuries of
the prehistoric age. These sagas, epics, and vedas do supply, in addition to
archaeology and philology, a third source of information about those vanished
times.

Here, for example, is the concluding passage of the Iliad, describing very
exactly the making of a prehistoric barrow. (We have taken here Chapman's
rhymed translation, correcting certain words with the help of the prose
version of Lang, Leaf, and Myers.)

    « . . . Thus oxen, mules, in wagons straight they put,
    Went forth, and an unmeasured pile of sylvan matter cut;
    Nine days employ'd in carriage, but when the tenth morn shin'd
    On wretched mortals, then they - brought the bravest of his, kind
    Forth to be burned. Troy swam in tears. Upon the pile's most height
    They laid the body, and gave fire. All day it burn'd, all night.
    But when th' elev'nth morn let on earth her rosy fingers shine,
    The people flock'd about the pile, and first, with gleaming wine
    Quench'd all the flames. His brothers then, and friends, the snowy bones
    Gather'd into an urn of gold, still pouring out their moans.
    Then wrapt they in soft purple veils the rich urn, digg'd a pit,
    Grav'd it, built up the grave with stones, and quickly piled on it
    A barrow. . . .
    . . . The barrow heap'd once, all the town
    In Jove-nurs'd Priam's Court partook a sumptuous fun'ral feast,
    And so horse-taming Hector's rites gave up his soul to rest.»

There remains also an old English saga, :t:`Beowulf`, made long before the
English had crossed from Germany into England, which winds up with a similar
burial. The preparation of a pyre is first described. It is hung round with
shields and coats of mail. The body is brought and the pyre fired, and then
for ten days the warriors built a mighty mound to be seen afar by the
traveller on sea or land. :t:`Beowulf`, which is at least a thousand years later
than the :t:`Iliad`, is also interesting because one of the main adventures in it
is the looting of the treasures of a barrow already ancient in those days.

.. [#fn3] But these may have been an originally Semitic people who learnt an Aryan speech.

