10.1 The Age of Cultivation Begins
================================================================

The Neolithic phase of human affairs began in Europe about 10,000 or 12,000
years ago. But probably men had reached the Neolithic stage elsewhere some
thousands of years earlier. Neolithic men came slowly into Europe from the
south or south-east as the reindeer and the open steppes gave way to forest
and modern European conditions.

The Neolithic stage in culture is characterized by:

1.  The presence of polished stone implements, and in particular the
    stone *axe,* which was perforated so as to be the more effectually
    fastened to a wooden handle, and which was probably used rather for
    working wood than in conflict. There are also abundant arrow-heads. The
    fact that some implements are polished does not preclude the presence of
    great quantities of implements of unpolished stone. But there are
    differences in the make between even the unpolished tools of the
    Neolithic and of the Paleolithic Period.
2.  The beginning of a sort of agriculture, and the use of plants and
    seeds. But at first there are abundant evidences that hunting was still
    of great importance in the Neolithic Age. Neolithic man did not at first
    sit down to his agriculture. He took snatch crops. He settled later.
3.  Pottery and proper cooking. The horse is no longer eaten.
4.  Domesticated animals. The dog appears very early. The Neolithic man
    had domesticated cattle, sheep, goats, and pigs. He was a huntsman turned
    herdsman of the herds he once hunted.
5.  Plaiting and weaving.

These Neolithic people probably "migrated" into Europe, in the same way that
the Reindeer Men had migrated before them; that is to say, generation by
generation and century by century, as the climate changed, they spread after
their accustomed food. They were not ?nomads?. Nomadism, like civilization,
had still to be developed. At present we are quite unable to estimate how far
the Neolithic peoples were new-comers and how far their arts were developed
or acquired by the descendants of some of the hunters and fishers of the
Later Paleolithic Age.

Whatever our conclusions in that matter, this much we may say with certainty;
there is no great break, no further sweeping away of one kind of man and
replacement by another kind between the appearance of the Neolithic way of
living and our own time. There are invasions, conquests, extensive
emigrations and intermixtures, but the races as a whole carry on and continue
to adapt themselves to the areas into which they began to settle in the
opening of the Neolithic Age. The Neolithic men of Europe were white men
ancestral to the modern Europeans. They may have been of a darker complexion
than many of their descendants; of that we cannot speak with certainty. But
there is no real break in culture from their time onward until we reach the
age of coal, steam, and power-driven machinery that began in the eighteenth
century.


.. _Figure 79:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0079.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0079.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 79

    Figure 79: Neolithic Implements

After a long time gold, the first known of the metals, appears among the bone
ornaments with jet and amber. Irish Neolithic remains are particularly rich
in gold. Then, perhaps 6,000 or 7,000 years ago in Europe, Neolithic people
began to use copper in certain centres, making out of it implements of much
the same pattern as their stone ones. They cast the copper in moulds made to
the shape of the stone implements. Possibly they first found native copper
and hammered it into shape.\ [#fn1]_ Later — we will not venture upon figures —
men had found out how to get copper from its ore. Perhaps, as Lord Avebury
suggested, they discovered the secret of smelting by the chance putting of
lumps of copper ore among the ordinary stones with which they built the fire
pits they used for cooking. In China, Hungary, Cornwall, and elsewhere copper
ore and tinstone occur in the same veins; it is a very common association,
and so, rather through dirtiness than skill, the ancient smelters, it may be,
hit upon the harder and better bronze, which is an alloy of copper and tin.
Bronze is not only harder than copper, but the mixture of tin and copper is
more fusible and easier to reduce. The so-called ?pure-copper? implements
usually contain a small proportion of tin, and there are no tin implements
known, nor very much evidence to show that early men knew of tin as a
separate metal.\ [#fn2]_ \ [#fn3]_ The plant of a prehistoric copper smelter has
been found in Spain, and the material of bronze foundries in various
localities. The method of smelting revealed by these finds carries out Lord
Avebury's suggestion. In India, where zinc and copper ore occur together,
brass (which is an alloy of the two metals) was similarly hit upon.

So slight was the change in fashions and methods produced by the appearance
of bronze, that for a long time such bronze axes and so forth as were made
were cast in moulds to the shape of the stone, implements they were
superseding.

Finally, perhaps as early as 3,000 years ago in Europe, and even earlier in
Asia Minor, men began to smelt iron. Once smelting was known to men, there is
no great marvel in the finding of iron. They smelted iron by blowing up a
charcoal fire, and wrought it by heating and hammering. They produced it at
first in comparatively small pieces;\ [#fn4]_ its appearance worked a gradual
revolution in weapons and implements; but it did not suffice to change the
general character of men's surroundings. Much the same daily life that was
being led by the more settled Neolithic men 10,000 years ago, was being led
by peasants in out-of-the-way places all over Europe at the beginning of the
eighteenth century.

People talk of the Stone Age, the Bronze Age, and the Iron Age in Europe, but
it is misleading to put these ages as if they were of equal importance in
history. Much truer is it to say that there was:

1.  An Early Paleolithic Age, of vast duration;

2.  A Later Paleolithic Age, that lasted not a tithe of the time; and

3.  The Age of Cultivation, the age of the white men in Europe, which
    began 10,000 or at most 12,000 years ago, of which the Neolithic Period
    was the beginning, and which is still going on.

.. [#fn1] Native copper is still found to-day in Italy, Hungary, Cornwall, and many other places.

.. [#fn2] Ridgeway (:t:`Early Age of Greece`) says a lump of tin has been found in the Swiss pile-dwelling deposits.

.. [#fn3] Tin was always known as a foreign import in Egypt under the XVIIIth
    Dynasty; there is (rare) Mycenaean tin, and there are (probably later, but
    not clearly dated) tin objects in the Caucasus. But it is very difficult to
    distinguish tin from antimony. There is a good deal of Cyprus bronze which
    contains antimony; a good deal which seems to be tin is antimony?the ancients
    trying to get tin, but actually getting antimony and thinking it was tin. —J. L. M.

.. [#fn4] In connection with iron, note the distinction of ornamental and useful
    iron. Ornamental iron, a rarity, perhaps meteoric, as jewelry or magical
    stuff, occurs in east Europe sporadically in the time of the XVIIIth Dynasty.
    This must be distinguished from the copious useful iron which appears in
    Greece much later from the North —J. L. M.
