10.3 Everyday Neolithic Life
================================================================

It will be of interest here to give a brief account of the life of the
European Neolithic people before the appearance of metals. We get our light
upon that life from various sources. They scattered their refuse about, and
in some places (e.g. on the Danish coast) it accumulated in great heaps,
known as the kitchen-middens. They buried some of their people — but not the
common herd — with great care and distinction, and made huge heaps of earth
over their sepulchres; these heaps are the barrows or dolmens which
contribute a feature to the European, Indian, and American scenery in many
districts to this day. In connection with these mounds, or independently of
them, they set up great stones (megaliths), either singly or in groups, of
which Stonehenge in Wiltshire and Carnac in Brittany are among the best-known
examples. In various places their villages are still traceable.

.. _Figure 82:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0082.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0082.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 82

    Figure 82: Pottery from Lake Dwellings

One fruitful source of knowledge about Neolithic life comes from Switzerland,
and was first revealed by the very dry winter of 1854, when the water level
of one of the lakes, sinking to an unheard-of lowness, revealed the
foundations of prehistoric pile dwellings of the Neolithic and early Bronze
Ages, built out over the water after the fashion of similar homes that exist
today in Celebes and elsewhere.

Not only were the timbers of those ancient platforms preserved, but a great
multitude of wooden, bone, stone, and earthenware utensils and ornaments,
remains of food and the like, were found in the peaty accumulations below
them. Even pieces of net and garments have been recovered. Similar lake
dwellings existed in Scotland, Ireland, and elsewhere — there are well-known
remains at Glastonbury in Somersetshire; in Ireland lake dwellings were
inhabited from prehistoric times up to the days when O'Neil of Tyrone was
fighting against the English before the plantation of Scotch colonists to
replace the Irish in Ulster in the reign of James I of England. These lake
villages had considerable defensive value, and there was a sanitary advantage
in living over flowing water.

Probably these Neolithic Swiss pile dwellings did not shelter the largest
communities that existed in those days. They were the homes of small
patriarchal groups. Elsewhere upon fertile plains and in more open country
there were probably already much larger assemblies of homes than in those
mountain valleys. There are traces of such a large community of families in
Wiltshire in England, for example; the remains of the stone circle of Avebury
near Silbury mound were once the ?finest megalithic ruin in Europe?. It
consisted of two circles of stones surrounded by a larger circle and a ditch,
and covering altogether twenty-eight and a half acres. From it two avenues of
stones, each a mile and a half long, ran west and south on either side of
Silbury Hill. Silbury Hill is the largest prehistoric artificial mound in
England. The dimensions of this centre of a faith and a social life now
forgotten altogether by men indicate the concerted efforts and interests of a
very large number of people, widely scattered though they may have been over
the west and south and centre of England. Possibly they assembled at some
particular season of the year in a primitive sort of fair. The whole
community ?lent a hand? in building the mounds and hauling the stones. The
Swiss pile dwellers, on the contrary, seem to have lived in practically self-
contained villages.

These lake-village people were considerably more advanced in methods and
knowledge, and probably much later in time than the early Neolithic people
who accumulated the shell mounds, known as kitchen-middens, on the Danish and
Scotch coasts. These kitchen-midden folk may have been as early as 10,000
B.C. or earlier; the lake dwellings were probably occupied continuously from
5,000 or 4,000 B.C. down almost to historic times. Those early kitchen-midden
people were among the most barbaric of Neolithic peoples, their stone axes
were rough, and they had no domesticated animal except the dog. The lake
dwellers, on the other hand, had, in addition to the dog, which was of a
medium-sized breed, oxen, goats, and sheep. Later on, as they were
approaching the Bronze Age, they got swine. The remains of cattle and goats
prevail in their debris and, having regard to the climate and country about
them, it seems probable that these beasts were sheltered in the buildings
upon the piles in winter, and that fodder was stored for them. Probably the
beasts lived in the same houses with the people, as the men and beasts do now
in Swiss chalets. The people in the houses possibly milked the cows and
goats, and milk perhaps played as important a part in their economy as it
does in that of the mountain Swiss of today. But of that we are not sure at
present. Milk is not a natural food for adults; it must have seemed queer
stuff to take at first; and it may have been only after much breeding that a
continuous supply of milk was secured from cows and goats. Some people think
that the use of milk, cheese, butter, and other milk products came later into
human life when men became nomadic. The writer is, however, disposed to give
the Neolithic men credit for having discovered milking. The milk, if they did
use it (and, no doubt, in that case sour curdled milk also, but not well made
cheese and butter), they must have kept in earthenware pots, for they had
pottery, though it was roughly hand-made pottery and not the shapely product
of the potter's wheel. They eked out this food supply by hunting. They killed
and ate red deer and roe deer, bison and wild boar. And they ate the fox, a
rather high-flavoured meat, and not what any one would eat in a world of
plenty. Oddly enough, they do not seem to have eaten the hare, although it
was available as food. They are supposed to have avoided eating it, as some
savages are said to avoid eating it to this day, because they feared that the
flesh of so timid a creature might make them, by a sort of infection,
cowardly.\ [#fn5]_

Of their agricultural methods we know very little. No ploughs and no hoes
have been found. They were of wood and have perished. Neolithic men
cultivated and ate wheat, barley and millet, but they knew nothing of oats or
rye. Their grain they roasted, ground between stones and stored in pots, to
be eaten when needed. And they made exceedingly solid and heavy bread,
because round flat slabs of it have been got out of these deposits.
Apparently they had no yeast. If they had no yeast, then they had no
fermented drink. One sort of barley that they had is the sort that was
cultivated by the ancient Greeks, Romans, and Egyptians, and they also had an
Egyptian variety of wheat, showing that their ancestors had brought or
derived this cultivation from the south-east. The centre of diffusion of
wheat was somewhere in the eastern Mediterranean region. A wild form is still
found in the neighbourhood of Mt. Hermon (see Footnote to :doc:`Chapter 14.1 <../140-the-first-civilizations/141-early-cities-and-early-nomads>`). When
the lake dwellers sowed their little patches of wheat in Switzerland, they
were already following the immemorial practice of mankind. The seed must have
been brought age by age from that distant centre of diffusion. In the
ancestral lands of the south-east men had already been sowing wheat perhaps
for thousands of years.\ [#fn6]_ Those lake dwellers also ate peas, and crab-
apples — the only apples that then existed in the world. Cultivation and
selection had not yet produced the apple of today.

They dressed chiefly in skins, but they also made a rough cloth of flax.
Fragments of that flaxen cloth have been discovered. Their nets were made of
flax; they had as yet no knowledge of hemp and hempen rope. With the coming
of bronze, their pins and ornaments increased in number. There is reason to
believe they set great store upon their hair, wearing it in large shocks with
pins of bone and afterwards of metal. To judge from the absence of realistic
carvings or engravings or paintings, they either did not decorate their
garments or decorated them with plaids, spots, interlacing designs, or
similar conventional ornament. Before the coming of bronze there is no
evidence of stools or tables; the Neolithic people probably squatted on their
clay floors. There were no cats in these lake dwellings; no mice or rats had
yet adapted themselves to human dwellings; the cluck of the hen was not as
yet added to the sounds of human life, nor the domestic egg to its
diet.\ [#fn7]_

.. _Figure 86:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0086.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0086.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 86

    Figure 86: Hut Urns

    Hut urns, the first probably presenting a lake-dwelling... After Lubbock.

The chief tool and weapon of Neolithic man was his axe; his next the bow and
arrow. His arrow-heads were of flint, beautifully made, and he lashed them
tightly to their shafts. Probably he prepared the ground for his sowing with
a pole, or a pole upon which he had stuck a stag's horn. Fish he hooked or
harpooned. These implements no doubt stood about in the interior of the
house, from the walls of which hung his fowling-nets. On the floor, which was
of clay or trodden cow dung (after the fashion of hut floors in India today),
stood pots and jars and woven baskets containing grain, milk, and such-like
food. Some of the pots and pans hung by rope loops to the walls. At one end
of the room, and helping to keep it warm in winter by their animal heat,
stabled the beasts. The children took the cows and goats out to graze, and
brought them in at night before the wolves and bears came prowling.

Since Neolithic man had the bow, he probably also had stringed instruments,
bow string seems almost inevitably to lead to that. He also had earthenware
drums across which skins were stretched; perhaps also he made drums by
stretching skins over hollow tree stems.\ [#fn8]_ We do not know when man began
to sing, but evidently he was making music, and since he had words, songs
were no doubt being made. To begin with, perhaps, he just let his voice loose
as one may hear Italian peasants now behind their ploughs singing songs
without words. After dark in the winter he sat in his house and talked and
sang and made implements by touch rather than sight.

His lighting must have been poor, and chiefly firelight, but there was
probably always some fire in the village, summer or winter. Fire was too
troublesome to make for men to be willing to let it out readily. Sometimes a
great disaster happened to those pile villages, the fire got free, and they
were burnt out. The Swiss deposits contain clear evidence of such
catastrophes.

All this we gather from the remains of the Swiss pile dwellings, and such was
the character of the human life that spread over Europe, coming from the
south and from the east with the forests as, 10,000 or 12,000 years ago, the
reindeer and the Reindeer men passed away. It is evident that we have here a
way of life already separated by a great gap of thousands of years of
intervention from its original Paleolithic stage. The steps by which it rose
from that condition we can only guess at. From being a hunter hovering upon
the outskirts of flocks and herds of wild cattle and sheep, and from being a
co-hunter with the dog, man by insensible degrees may have developed a sense
of proprietorship in the beasts and struck up a friendship with his canine
competitor. He learnt to turn the cattle when they wandered too far; he
brought his better brain to bear to guide them to fresh pasture. He hemmed
the beasts into valleys and enclosures where he could be sure to find them
again. He fed them when they starved, and so slowly he tamed them. Perhaps
his agriculture began with the storage of fodder. He reaped, no doubt, before
he sowed. The Paleolithic ancestor away in that unknown land of origin to the
south-east first supplemented the precarious meat supply of the hunter by
eating roots and fruits and wild grain. Man storing graniferous grasses for
his cattle might easily come to beat out the grain for himself.

.. [#fn5] Caesar *de Bello Gallico* says Britons tabooed hare, fowl, and goose. —G. Wh.

.. [#fn6] All Old World peoples who had entered upon the Neolithic stage grew and
    ate wheat, but the American Indians must have developed agriculture
    independently in America after their separation from the Old World
    populations. They never had wheat. Their cultivation was maize, Indian corn,
    a New World grain.

.. [#fn7] Poultry and hens' eggs were late additions to the human cuisine, in spite
    of the large part they now play in our dietary. The hen is not mentioned in
    the Old Testament (but note the allusion to an egg, Job vi, 6) nor by Homer,
    Up to about 1,500 B.C. the only fowls in the world were jungle denizens in
    India and Burnish. The crowing of jungle cocks is noted by Glasfurd in his
    admirable accounts of tiger shooting as the invariable preliminary of dawn in
    the Indian jungle. Probably poultry were first domesticated in Burmah. They
    got to China, according to the records, only about 1,100 B.C. They reached
    Greece via Persia before the time of Socrates. In the New Testament the
    crowing of the cock reproaches Peter for his desertion of the Master.

.. [#fn8] Later Paleolithic bone whistles are known. One may guess that reed pipes were an early invention.
