10.4 Primitive Trade
================================================================

All these early beginnings must have taken place far back in time, and in
regions of the world that have still to be effectively explored by the
archaeologists. They were probably going on in Asia or Africa, in what is now
the bed of the Mediterranean, or in the region of the Indian Ocean, while the
Reindeer man was developing his art in Europe. The Neolithic men who drifted
over Europe and Western Asia 12,000 or 10,000 years ago were long past these
beginnings; they were already close, a few thousand years, to the dawn of
written tradition and the remembered history of mankind. Without any very
great shock or break, bronze came at last into human life, giving a great
advantage in warfare to those tribes who first obtained it. Written history
had already begun before weapons of iron came into Europe to supersede
bronze.

Already in those days a sort of primitive trade had sprung up. Bronze and
bronze weapons, and such rare and hard stones as jade, gold because of its
plastic and ornamental possibilities, and skins and flax-net and cloth, were
being swapped and stolen and passed from hand to hand over great stretches of
country. Salt also was probably being traded. On a meat diet men can live
without salt, but grain-consuming people need it just as herbivorous animals
need it. Hopf says that bitter tribal wars have been carried on by the desert
tribes of the Soudan in recent years for the possession of the salt deposits
between Fezzan and Murzuk. To begin with, barter, blackmail, tribute, and
robbery by violence passed into each other by insensible degrees. Men got
what they wanted, by such means as they could.

