10.5 The Flooding of the Mediterranean Valley
================================================================

So far we have been telling of a history without events, a history of ages
and periods and stages in development. But before we conclude this portion of
the human story, we must record what was probably an event of primary
importance and at first perhaps of tragic importance to developing mankind,
and that was the breaking in of the Atlantic waters to the great
Mediterranean valley.

The reader must keep in mind that we are endeavouring to give him plain
statements that he can take hold of comfortably. But both in the matter of
our time charts and the three maps we have given of prehistoric geography
there is necessarily much speculative matter. We have dated the last Glacial
Age and the appearance of the true men as about 40,000 or 35,000 years ago.
Please bear that "about" in mind. The truth may be 60,000 or 20,000. But it
is no good saying "a very long time" or "ages" ago, because then the reader
will not know whether we mean centuries or millions of years. And similarly
in these maps we give, they represent not the truth, but something like the
truth. The outline of the land was "some such outline".

There were such seas and such land masses. But both Mr. Horrabin, who has
drawn these maps, and I, who have incited him to do so, have preferred to err
on the timid side. We are not geologists enough to launch out into original
research in these matters, and so we have stuck to the 40-fathom line and the
recent deposits as our guides for our postglacial map, and for the map of
12,000 to 10,000 B.C. But in one matter we have gone beyond these guides. It
is practically certain that at the end of the last Glacial Age, the
Mediterranean was a couple of land-locked sea basins, not connected — or only
connected by a torrential overflow river. The eastern basin was the fresher;
it was fed by the Nile, the "Adriatic" river, the "Red-Sea" river, and
perhaps by a river that poured, down amidst the mountains that are now the
Greek Archipelago from the very much bigger Sea of Central Asia that then
existed. Almost certainly human beings, and possibly even Neolithic men,
wandered over that now lost Mediterranean valley.

The reasons for believing this are very good and plain. To this day the
Mediterranean is a sea of evaporation. The rivers that flow into it do not
make up for the evaporation from its surface. There is a constant current of
water pouring into the Mediterranean from the Atlantic, and another current
streaming in from the Bosporus and Black Sea. For the Black Sea gets more
water than it needs from the big rivers that flow into it; it is an
overflowing sea, while the Mediterranean is a thirsty sea. From which it must
be plain that when the Mediterranean was cut off both from the Atlantic Ocean
and the Black Sea it must have been a shrinking sea with its waters sinking
to a much lower level than those of the ocean outside. This is the case of
the Caspian Sea today. Still more so is it the case with the Dead Sea.

But if this reasoning is sound, then where today roll the blue waters of the
Mediterranean there must once have been great areas of land, and land with a
very agreeable climate. This was probably the case during the last Glacial
Age, and we do not know how near it was to our time when the change occurred
that brought back the ocean waters into the Mediterranean basin. Certainly
there must have been Grimaldi people, and perhaps even Azilian and Neolithic
people going about in the valleys and forests of these regions that are now
submerged. The Neolithic Dark Whites, the people of the Mediterranean race,
may have gone far towards the beginnings of settlement and civilization in
that great lost Mediterranean valley.

Mr. W. B. Wright \ [#fn9]_ gives us some very stimulating suggestions here. He
suggests that in the Mediterranean basin there were two lakes,

    one a fresh-water lake, in the eastern depression, which drained into the other in the
    western depression. It is interesting to think what must have happened when
    the ocean level rose once more as a result of the dissipation of the ice-
    sheets, and its waters began to pour over into the Mediterranean area. The
    inflow, small at first, must have ultimately increased to enormous
    dimensions, as the channel was slowly lowered by erosion and the ocean level
    slowly rose. If there were any unconsolidated materials on the sill of the
    Strait, the result must have been a genuine debacle, and if we consider the
    length of time which even an enormous torrent would take to fill such a basin
    as that of the Mediterranean, we must conclude that this result was likely to
    have been attained in any case. Now, this may seem all the wildest
    speculation, but it is not entirely so, for if we examine a submarine contour
    map of the Straits of Gibraltar, we find there is an enormous valley running
    up from the Mediterranean deep, right through the Straits, and trenching some
    distance out on to the Atlantic shelf. This valley or gorge is probably the
    work of the inflowing waters of the ocean at the termination of the period of
    interior drainage.

This refilling of the Mediterranean, which by the rough chronology we are
employing in this book may have happened somewhen between 30,000 and 10,000
B.C., must have been one of the greatest single events in the pre-history our
race. If the later date is the truer, then, as the reader will see plainly
enough after reading the next two chapters, the crude beginnings of
civilization, the first lake dwellings and the first cultivation, were
probably round that eastern Levantine Lake into which there flowed not only
the Nile, but the two great rivers that are now the Adriatic and the Red Sea.
Suddenly the ocean waters began to break through over the westward hills and
to pour in upon these primitive peoples — the lake that had been their home
and friend became their enemy; its waters rose and never abated; their
settlements were submerged; the waters pursued them in their flight. Day by
day and year by year the waters spread up the valleys and drove mankind
before them. Many must have been surrounded and caught by the continually
rising salt flood. It knew no check; it came faster and faster; it rose over
the tree-tops, over the hills, until it had filled the whole basin of the
present Mediterranean and until it lapped the mountain cliffs of Arabia and
Africa. Far away, long before the dawn of history, this catastrophe occurred.

.. [#fn9] :t:`The Quaternary Ice Age`
