7.1 Man Descended From a Walking Ape
========================================
The origin of man is still very obscure. It is commonly asserted that he is
"descended" from some man-like ape such as the chimpanzee, the orang-utang,
or the gorilla, but that of course is as reasonable as saying that I am
"descended" from some Hottentot or Esquimau as young or younger than myself.
Others, alive to this objection, say that man is descended from the common
ancestor of the chimpanzee, the orang-utang, and the gorilla. Some
"anthropologists" have even indulged in a speculation whether mankind may not
have a double or treble origin; the Negro being descended from a gorilla-like
ancestor, the Chinese from a chimpanzee-like ancestor, and so on. These are
very fanciful ideas, to be mentioned only to be dismissed. It was formerly
assumed that the human ancestor was "probably arboreal", but the current idea
among those who are qualified to form an opinion seems to be that he was a
"ground ape", and that the existing apes have developed in the arboreal
direction.

.. _Figure 47:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0047.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :target: ../_static/figures/0047.png
    :width: 280
    :alt: Figure 47

    Figure 47: Time Diagram Of The Glacial Ages

    The reader should compare this diagram carefully with our first time diagram (:ref:`Figure 11`). That diagram, if it were on the same scale as this one, would be between 41 and 410 feet long. The position of the :doc:`Eoanthropus </70-the-ancestry-of-man/74-the-piltdown-sub-man>` is very uncertain; it may be as early as the Pliocene.

Of course if one puts the skeleton of a man and the skeleton of a gorilla
side by side, their general resemblance is so great that it is easy to jump
to the conclusion that the former is derived from such a type as the latter
by a process of brain growth and general refinement. But if one examines
closely into one or two differences, the gap widens. Particular stress has
recently been laid upon the tread of the foot. Man walks on his toe and his
heel; his great toe is his chief lever in walking, as the reader may see for
himself if he examines his own footprints on the bathroom floor and notes
where the pressure falls as the footprints become fainter. His great toe is
the king of his toes.

Among all the apes and monkeys, the only group that have their great toes
developed on anything like the same fashion as man are some of the lemurs.
The baboon walks on a flat foot and all his toes, using his middle toe as his
chief throw-off, much as the bear does. And the three great apes all walk on
the outer side of the foot in a very different manner from the walking of
man.

The great apes are forest dwellers; their walking even now is incidental;
they are at their happiest among trees. They have very distinctive methods of
climbing; they swing by the arms much more than the monkeys do, and do not,
like the latter, take off with a spring from the feet. They have a specially
developed climbing style of their own. But man walks so well and runs so
swiftly as to suggest a very long ancestry upon the ground. Also, he does not
climb well now; he climbs with caution and hesitation. His ancestors may have
been running creatures for long ages. Moreover, it is to be noted that he
does not swim naturally; he has to learn to swim, and that seems to point to
a long-standing separation from rivers and lakes and the sea. Almost
certainly that ancestor was a smaller and slighter creature than its human
descendants. Conceivably the human ancestor at the opening of the Cainozoic
period was a running ape living chiefly on the ground, hiding among rocks
rather than trees. It could still climb trees well and hold things between
its great toe and its second toe (as the Japanese can to this day), but it
was already coming down to the ground again from a still remoter, a Mesozoic
arboreal ancestry. It is quite understandable that such a creature would very
rarely die in water in such circumstances as to leave bones to become
fossilized.

.. _Figure 48:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0048.png
    :figclass: inline-figure left
    :alt: Figure 48
    :width: 280px
    :target: ../_static/figures/0048.png

    Figure 48: Early Pleistocene Animals, contemporary with Earliest Man

It must always be borne in mind that among its many other imperfections the
Geological Record necessarily contains abundant traces only of water or marsh
creatures or of creatures easily and frequently drowned. The same reasons
that make any traces of the ancestors of the mammals rare and relatively
unprocurable in the Mesozoic rocks, probably make the traces of possible
human ancestors rare and relatively unprocurable in the Cainozoic rocks. Such
knowledge as we have of the earliest men, for example, is almost entirely got
from a few eaves, into which they went and in which they left their traces.
Until the hard Pleistocene times they lived and died in the open, and their
bodies were consumed or decayed altogether.

But it is well to bear in mind also that the record of the rocks has still to
be thoroughly examined. It has been studied only for a few generations, and
by only a few men in each generation. Most men have been too busy making war,
making profits out of their neighbours, toiling at work that machinery could
do for them in a tenth of the time, or simply playing about, to give any
attention to these more interesting things. There may be, there probably are,
thousands of deposits still untouched containing countless fragments and
vestiges of man and his progenitors. In Asia particularly, in India or the
East Indies, there may be hidden the most illuminating clues. What we know
today of early men is the merest scrap of what will presently be known.

The apes and monkeys already appear to have been differentiated at the
beginning of the Cainozoic Age, and there are a number of Oligocene and
Miocene apes whose relations to one another and to the human line have still
to be made out. Among these we may mention *Dryopithecus* of the Miocene Age,
with a very human-looking jaw. In the Siwalik Hills of northern India remains
of some very interesting apes have been found, of which *Sivapithecus* and
*Paleopithecus* were possibly related closely to the human ancestor. Possibly
these animals already used implements. Charles Darwin represents baboons as
opening nuts by breaking them with stones, using stakes to prise up rocks in
the hunt for insects, and striking blows with sticks and stones. The
chimpanzee makes itself a sort of tree hut by intertwining branches. Stones
apparently chipped for use have been found in strata of Oligocene Age at
Boncelles in Belgium. Possibly the implement-using disposition was already
present in the Mesozoic ancestry from which we are descended.
