7.3 The Heidelberg Sub-Man
==============================
After this first glimpse of something at least sub-human in the record of
geology, there is not another fragment of human or man-like bone yet known
from that record for an interval of hundreds of thousands of years. It is not
until we reach deposits which are stated to be of the Second Interglacial
period, 200,000 years later, *200,000* or *250,000* years ago, that another
little scrap of bone comes to hand. Then we find a jaw-bone.

This jaw-bone was found in a sand-pit near Heidelberg, at a depth of eighty
feet from the surface, and it is not the jawbone of a man as we understand
man, but it is man-like in every respect, except that it has absolutely no
trace of a chin; it is more massive than a man's, and its narrowness behind
could not, it is thought, have given the tongue sufficient play for
articulate speech. It is not an ape's jaw-bone; the teeth are human. The
owner of this jaw-bone, has been variously named *Homo Heidelbergensis* and
*Paleoanthropus Heidelbergensis,* according to the estimate formed of his
humanity or sub-humanity by various authorities. He lived in a world not
remotely unlike the world of the still earlier sub- man of the first
implements; the deposits in which it is found show that there were elephants,
horses, rhinoceroses, bison, a moose, and so forth with it in the world, but
the sabre-toothed tiger was declining and the lion was spreading over Europe.
The implements of this period (known as the Chellean period) are a very
considerable advance upon those of the Pliocene Age. They are well made but*
very much bigger* than any truly human implements. The Heidelberg man may
have had a very big body and large fore limbs. He may have been a woolly,
strange-looking creature.
