7.4 The Piltdown Sub-Man
==========================
.. admonition:: Editor's Note
    
    This article was written circa 1920. In 1953, work at Oxford University demonstrated that the **Piltdown Man was a forgery** comprising the bones of three different species. Read more about the `Piltdown Hoax on Wikipedia`_.

.. _Piltdown Hoax on Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Piltdown_Man

We must turn over the Record for, it may be, another 100,000 years for the
next remains of anything human or sub-human. Then in a deposit ascribed to
the Third Interglacial period, which may have begun 100,000 years ago and
lasted 50,000 years, the smashed pieces of a whole skull turn up. The deposit
is a gravel which may have been derived from the washing out of still earlier
gravel strata, and this skull fragment may be in reality as old as the First
Glacial Period. The bony remains discovered at Piltdown in Sussex display a
creature still ascending only very gradually from the sub-human.

The first scraps of this skull were found in an excavation for road gravel in
Sussex. Bit by bit other fragments of this skull were hunted out from the
quarry heaps until most of it could be pieced together. It is a thick skull,
thicker than that of any living race of men, and. it has a brain capacity
intermediate between that of Pithecanthropus and man. This creature has been
named *Eoanthropus*, the dawn man. In the same gravel-pits were found teeth
of rhinoceros, hippopotamus, and the leg-bone of a deer with marks upon it
that may be cuts. A curious bat-shaped instrument of elephant bone has also
been found.

There was moreover a jaw-bone among these scattered remains, which was at
first assumed naturally enough to belong to *Eoanthropus,* but which it was
afterwards suggested was probably that of a chimpanzee. It is extraordinarily
like that of a chimpanzee, but Dr. Keith, one of the greatest authorities in
these questions, assigns it, after an exhaustive analysis in his *Antiquity
of Man* (1915), to the skull with which it is found. It is, as a jaw- bone,
far less human in character than the jaw of the much more ancient *Homo
Heidelbergensis,* but the teeth are in some respects more like those of
living men.

Dr. Keith, swayed by the jaw-bone, does not think that *Eoanthropus*, in
spite of its name, is a creature in the direct ancestry of man. Much less is
it an intermediate form between the Heidelberg man and the Neanderthal man we
shall presently describe. It was only related to the true ancestor of man as
the orang is related to the chimpanzee. It was one of a number of sub-human
running apes of more than ape-like intelligence, and if it was not on the
line royal, it was at any rate a very close collateral.

After this glimpse of a skull, the Record for very many centuries gives
nothing but flint implements, which improve steadily in quality. A very
characteristic form is shaped like a sole, with one flat side stricken off at
one blow and the other side worked. The archaeologists, as the Record
continues, are presently able to distinguish scrapers, borers, knives, darts,
throwing tones, and the like. Progress is now more rapid; in a few centuries
the shape of the hand-axe shows distinct and recognizable improvements. And
then comes quite a number of remains. The Fourth Glacial Ago is rising
towards its maximum. Man is taking to eaves and leaving vestiges there; at
Krapina in Croatia, at Neanderthal near Dusseldorf, at Spy, human remains
have been found, skulls and bones of a creature that is certainly a man.
Somewhen about 50,000 years ago, if not earlier, appeared *Homo
Neanderthalensis* (also called *Homo antiquus* and *Homo primigenius),* a
quite passable human being. His thumb was not quite equal in flexibility and
usefulness to a human thumb; he stooped forward and could not hold his head
erect, as all living men do; he was chinless and perhaps incapable of speech;
there were curious differences about the enamel and the roots of his teeth
from those of all living men; he was very thick-set; he was, indeed, not
quite of the human species; but there is no dispute about his attribution to
the genus *Homo.* He was certainly not descended from Eoanthropus, but his
jaw-bone is so like the Heidelberg jaw-bone, as to make it possible that the
clumsier and heavier *Homo Heidelbergensis,* a thousand centuries before him,
was of his blood and race.

