5.1 The Age of Lowland Life
=============================

We know that for hundreds of thousands of years the wetness and warmth, the
shallow lagoon conditions that made possible the vast accumulations of
vegetable matter which, compressed and mummified, are now coal\ [#fn01]_,
prevailed over most of the world. There were some cold intervals, it is true;
but they did not last long enough to destroy the growths. Then that long ago
age of luxuriant low-grade vegetation drew to its end, and for a time life on
the earth seems to have undergone a period of world-wide bleakness.

We cannot discuss fully here the changes that have gone on and are going on
in the climate of the earth. A great variety of causes, astronomical
movements, changes in the sun and changes upon and within the earth, combine
to produce a ceaseless fluctuation of the conditions under which life exists.
As these conditions change, life, too, must change or perish.

When the story resumes again after this arrest at the end of the Paleozoic
period we find life entering upon a fresh phase of richness and expansion.
Vegetation has made great advances in the art of living out of water. While
the Paleozoic plants of the coal measures probably grew with swamp water
flowing over their roots, the Mesozoic flora from its very outset included
palm-like cycads and low-grown conifers that were distinctly land plants
growing on soil above the water level.

The lower levels of the Mesozoic land were no doubt covered by great fern
brakes and shrubby bush and a kind of jungle growth of trees. But there
existed as yet no grass, no small flowering plants, no turf nor greensward.
Probably the Mesozoic was not an age of very brightly coloured vegetation. It
must have had a flora green in the wet season and brown and. purple in the
dry. There were no gay flowers, no bright autumn tints before the fall of the
leaf, because there was as yet no fall of the leaf. And beyond the lower
levels the world was still barren, still unclothed, still exposed without any
mitigation to the wear and tear of the wind and rain.

When one speaks of conifers in the Mesozoic the reader must not think of the
pines and firs that clothe the high mountain slopes of our time. He must
think of low-growing evergreens. The mountains were still as bare and
lifeless as ever. The only colour effects among the mountains were the colour
effects of naked rock, such colours as make the landscape of Colorado so
marvelous today.

Amidst this spreading vegetation of the lower plains the reptiles were
increasing mightily in multitude and variety. They were now in many cases
absolutely land animals. There are numerous anatomical points of distinction
between a reptile and an amphibian; they held good between such reptiles and
amphibians as prevailed in the carboniferous time of the Upper Paleozoic; but
the fundamental difference between reptiles and amphibia which matters in
this history is that the amphibian must go back to the water to lay its eggs,
and that in the early stages of its life it must live in and under water. The
reptile, on the other hand, has cut out all the tadpole stages from its life
cycle, or, to be more exact, its tadpole stages are got through before the
young leave the egg case. The reptile has come out of the water altogether.
Some had gone back to it again, just as the hippopotamus and the otter among
mammals have gone back, but that is a further extension of the story to which
we cannot give much attention in this *Outline.*

.. figure:: /_static/figures/0027.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280
    :alt: Figure 27
    :target: ../_static/figures/0027.png

    Figure 27: Some Mesozoic Reptiles

    Six foot man drawn to same scale for comparison


In the Paleozoic period, as we have said, life had not spread beyond the
swampy river valleys and the borders of sea lagoons and the like; but in the
Mesozoic, life was growing ever more accustomed to the thinner medium of the
air, was sweeping boldly up over the plains and towards the hill-sides. It is
well for the student of human history and the human future to note that. If a
disembodied intelligence with no knowledge of the future had come to earth
and studied life during the early Paleozoic age, he might very reasonably
have concluded that life was absolutely confined to the water, and that it
could never spread over the land. It found a way. In the Later Paleozoic
Period that visitant might have been equally sure that life could not go
beyond the edge of a swamp. The Mesozoic Period would still have found him
setting bounds to life far more limited than the bounds that are set today.
And so today, though we mark how life and, man are still limited to five
miles of air and a depth of perhaps a mile or so of sea, we must not conclude
from that present limitation that life, through man, may not presently spread
out and up and down to a range of living as yet inconceivable.

The earliest known reptiles were beasts with great bellies and not very
powerful legs, very like their kindred amphibia, wallowing as the crocodile
wallows to this day; but, in the Mesozoic they soon began to stand up and go
stoutly on all fours, and several great sections of them began to balance
themselves on tail and hind-legs, rather as the kangaroos do now, in order to
release the fore limbs for grasping food. The bones of one notable division
of reptiles which retained a quadrupedal habit, a division of which many
remains have been found in South African and Russian Early Mesozoic deposits,
display a number of characters which approach those of the mammalian
skeleton, and because of this resemblance to the mammals (beasts) this
division is called the *Theriomorpha* (beastlike). Another division was the
crocodile branch, and, another developed towards the tortoises and turtles.
The *Plesiosaurs* and *ichthyosaurs* were two groups which have left no
living representatives; they were huge reptiles returning to a whale-like
life in the sea. *Pliosaurus*, one of the largest plesiosaurs, measured
thirty feet from snout to tail tip â€“ of which half was neck. The *Mosasaurs*
were a third group of great porpoise-like marine lizards. But the largest and
most diversified group of these Mesozoic reptiles was the group we have
spoken of as kangaroo-like, the *Dinosaurs,* many of which attained, enormous
proportions. In bigness these greater *Dinosaurs* have never been exceeded,
although the sea can still show in the whales creatures as great. Some of
these, and the largest among them, were herbivorous animals; they browsed on
the rushy vegetation and among the ferns and bushes, or they stood up and
grasped trees with their fore-legs while they devoured the foliage. Among the
browsers, for example, were the *Diplodocus carnegii,* which measured eighty-
four feet in length, and the *Atlantosaurus.* The *Gigantosaurus,*
disinterred by a German expedition in 1912 from rocks in East Africa, was
still more colossal. It measured well over a hundred feet! These greater
monsters had legs, and they are usually figured as standing up on them; but
it is very doubtful if they could, have supported their weight in this way,
out of water. Buoyed up by water or mud, they may have got along. Another
noteworthy type we have figured is the *Triceratops.* There were also a
number of great flesh-eaters who preyed upon these herbivores. Of these,
*Tyrannosaurus* seems almost the last word in "frightfulness" among living
things. Some species of this genus measured forty feet from snout to tail.
Apparently it carried this vast body kangaroo, fashion on its tail and hind
legs. Probably it reared itself up. Some authorities even suppose that it
leapt through the air. If so, it possessed muscles of a quite miraculous
quality. A leaping elephant would be a far less astounding idea. Much more
probably it waded half submerged in pursuit of the herbivorous river
saurians.

.. figure:: /_static/figures/0030.png
    :figclass: full-figure
    :width: 600px
    :alt: Figure 30
    :target: ../_static/figures/0030.png

    Figure 30: Some Later Mesozoic Reptiles


.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#fn01] Dr. Marie Stopes, :t:`Monograph on the Constitution of Coal`.

