
5.3 The First Birds
===================

.. figure:: /_static/figures/0031.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 31
    :target: ../_static/figures/0031.png

    Figure 31: Pterodactyls and Archaeopteryx

Far less prevalent at this time were certain other truly birdlike creatures,
of which the earlier sorts also hopped and clambered and the later sorts
skimmed and flew. These were at first – by all the standards of
classification – Reptiles. They developed into true birds as they developed
wings and as their reptilian scales became long and complicated, fronds
rather than scales, and so at last, by much spreading and splitting,
feathers. Feathers are the distinctive covering of birds, and they give a
power of resisting heat and, cold far greater than that of any other
integumentary covering except perhaps the thickest fur. At a very early stage
this novel covering of feathers, this new heat-proof contrivance that life
had chanced upon, enabled many species of birds to invade a province for
which the pterodactyl was ill equipped. They took to sea fishing — if indeed
they did not begin with it — and spread to the north and south polewards beyond
the temperature limits set to the true reptiles. The earliest birds seem to
have been carnivorous divers and water birds. To this day some of the most
primitive bird forms are found among the sea birds of the Arctic and
Antarctic seas, and it is among these sea birds that zoologists still find
lingering traces of teeth, which have otherwise vanished completely from the
beak of the bird.

The earliest known bird (the *Archaeopteryx*) had no beak; it had a row of
teeth in a jaw like a reptile's. It had three claws at the forward corner of
its wing. Its tail, too, was peculiar. All modern birds have their tail
feathers set in a short compact bony rump; the *Archaeopteryx* had a long
bony tail with a row of feathers along each side.
