
5.5 The First Appearance of Fur and Feathers
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

Were there mammals in the Mesozoic period?

This is a question not yet to be answered precisely. Patiently and steadily
the geologist's gather fresh evidence and reason out completer conclusions.
At any time some new deposit may reveal fossils that will illuminate this
question. Certainly either mammals, or the ancestors of the mammals, must
have lived throughout the Mesozoic period. In the very opening chapter of the
Mesozoic volume of the Record there were those Theriomorphous Reptiles to
which we have already alluded, and in the later Mesozoic a number of small
jawbones are found, entirely mammalian in character. But there is not a
scrap, not a bone, to suggest that there lived any Mesozoic Mammal which
could look a dinosaur in the face. The Mesozoic mammals or mammal-like
reptiles — for we do not know clearly which they were — seem to have been All
obscure little beasts of the size of mice and rats, more like a downtrodden
order of reptiles than a distinct class; probably they still laid eggs and
were developing only slowly their distinctive covering of hair. They lived
away from big waters, and perhaps in the desolate uplands, as marmots do now;
probably they lived there beyond the pursuit of the carnivorous dinosaurs.
Some perhaps went on all fours, some chiefly went on their hind-legs and
clambered with their fore limbs. They became fossils only so occasionally
that chance has not yet revealed a single complete skeleton in the whole vast
record of the Mesozoic rocks by which to check these guesses.

These little Theriomorphs, these ancestral mammals, developed hair. Hairs,
like feathers, are long and elaborately specialized scales. Hair is perhaps
the clue to, the salvation of the early mammals. Leading lives upon the
margin of existence, away from the marshes and the warmth, they developed an
outer covering only second in its warmth-holding (or heat-resisting) powers
to the down and. feathers of the Arctic seabirds. And so they held out
through the age of hardship between the Mesozoic and Cainozoic ages, to which
most of the true reptiles succumbed.

.. figure:: /_static/figures/0035.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 35
    :target: ../_static/figures/0035.png

    Figure 35: Hesperornis – Reptilian wingless water-bird

All the main characteristics of this flora and sea and land fauna that came
to an end with the end of the Mesozoic age were such as were adapted to an
equable climate and to shallow and swampy regions. But in the case of their
Cainozoic successors, both hair and feathers gave *a power of resistance to
variable temperatures* such as no reptile possessed, and with it gave a range
far greater than any animal had hitherto attained.

The range of life of the Lower Paleozoic Period was confined to warm water.

The range of life of the Upper Paleozoic Period was confined to warm water or
to warm swamps and wet ground.

The range of life of the Mesozoic Period as we know it was confined to water
and fairly low-lying valley regions under equable conditions.

Meanwhile in each of these periods there were types involuntarily extending
the range of life beyond the limits prevailing in that period; and when ages
of extreme, conditions prevailed, it was these marginal types which survived
to inherit the depopulated world.

That perhaps is the most general statement we can make about the story of the
geological record; it is a story of widening range. Classes, genera, and
species of animals appear and disappear, but the range widens. It widens
always. Life has never had so great a range as it has today. Life today, in
the form of man, goes higher in the air than it has ever done before; man's
geographical range is from pole to pole, he goes under the water in
submarines, he sounds the cold, lifeless darkness of the deepest seas, he
burrows into virgin levels of the rocks, and in thought and knowledge he
pierces to the centre of the earth and reaches out to the uttermost star. Yet
in all the relics of the Mesozoic time we find no certain memorials of his
ancestry. His ancestors, like the ancestors of all the kindred mammals, must
have been creatures so rare, so obscure, and so remote that they have left
scarcely a trace amidst the abundant vestiges of the monsters that wallowed
rejoicing in the steamy air and lush vegetation of the Mesozoic lagoons, or
crawled or hopped or fluttered over the great river plains of that time.
