19.1 The Place of the Israelites in History
================================================================

.. _Figure 219:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0219.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0219.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 219

    Figure 219: Map — The Land of the Hebrews

We are now in a position to place in their proper relationship to this
general outline of human history the Israelites, and the most remarkable
collection of ancient documents in the world, that collection which is known
to all Christian peoples as the Old Testament. We find in these documents the
most interesting and valuable lights upon the development of civilization,
and the clearest indications of a new spirit that was coming into human
affairs during the struggles of Egypt and Assyria for predominance in the
world of men.

All the books that constitute the Old Testament were certainly in existence,
and in very much their present form, at latest by the year 100 B.C. Most of
them were probably recognized as sacred writings in the time of Alexander the
Great (330 B.C.). They were the sacred literature of a people, the Jews, who,
except for a small remnant of common people, had recently been deported to
Babylonia from their own country in 587 B.C. by `Nebuchadnezzar II`_, the
Chaldean. They had returned to their city, Jerusalem, and had rebuilt their
temple there under the auspices of `Cyrus`_, that Persian conqueror who, we
have already noted, in 539 B.C. overthrew Nabonidus, the last of the Chaldean
rulers in Babylon. The Babylonian Captivity had lasted about fifty years, and
many authorities are of opinion that there was a considerable admixture
during that period both of race and ideas with the Babylonians.

.. _Nebuchadnezzar II: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nebuchadrezzar_II
.. _Cyrus: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyrus_the_Great

The position of the land of Judea and of Jerusalem, its capital, is a
peculiar one. The country is a band-shaped strip between the Mediterranean to
the west and the desert beyond the Jordan to the east; through it lies the
natural high-road between the Hittites, Syria, Assyria, and Babylonia to the
north and Egypt to the south. It was a country predestined, therefore, to a
stormy history. Across it Egypt, and whatever power was ascendant in the
north, fought for empire; against its people they fought for a trade route.
It had itself neither the area, the agricultural possibilities, nor the
mineral wealth to be important. The story of its people that these scriptures
have preserved runs like a commentary to the greater history of the two
systems of civilization to the north and south and of the sea peoples to the
west.

These scriptures consist of a number of different elements. The first five
books, the *Pentateuch,* were early regarded with peculiar respect. They
begin in the form of a universal history with a double account of the
Creation of the world and mankind, of the early life of the race, and of a
great Flood by which, except for certain favoured individuals, mankind was
destroyed. This flood story is very widely distributed in ancient traditions;
it may be a memory of that :doc:`flooding of the Mediterranean valley <../100-neolithic-man-in-europe/105-the-flooding-of-the-mediterranean-valley>` which
occurred in the Neolithic age of mankind. Excavations have revealed
Babylonian versions of both the Creation story and the Flood story of prior
date to the restoration of the Jews, and it is therefore argued by Biblical
critics that these opening chapters were acquired by the Jews during their
captivity. They constitute the first ten chapters of Genesis.

There follows a history of the fathers and founders of the Hebrew nation,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. They are presented as patriarchal Bedouin chiefs,
living the life of nomadic shepherds in the country between Babylonia and
Egypt. The existing Biblical account is said by the critics to be made up out
of several pre-existing versions; but whatever its origins, the story, as we
have it today, is full of colour and vitality. What is called Palestine today
was at that time the land of Canaan, inhabited by a Semitic people called the
Canaanites, closely related to the Phoenicians who founded Tyre and Sidon,
and to the Amorites who took Babylon and, under `Hammurabi`_, founded the
first Babylonian Empire. The Canaanites were a settled folk in the days —
which were perhaps contemporary with the days of Hammurabi — when Abraham's
flocks and herds passed through the land. The God of Abraham, says the Bible
narrative, promised this smiling land of prosperous cities to him and to his
children. To the book of Genesis the reader must go to read how Abraham,
being childless, doubted this promise, and of the births of Ishmael and
Isaac. And in Genesis, too, he will find the lives of Isaac and Jacob, whose
name was changed to Israel, and of the twelve sons of Israel; and how in the
days of a great famine they went down into Egypt. With that, Genesis, the
first book of the Pentateuch, ends. The next book, Exodus, is concerned with
the story of Moses.

.. _Hammurabi: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hammurabi

The story of the settlement and slavery of the children of Israel in Egypt is
a difficult one. There is an Egyptian record of a settlement of certain
Semitic peoples in the land of Goshen by the `Pharaoh Rameses II`_, and it is
stated that they were drawn into Egypt by want of food. But of the life and
career of Moses there is no Egyptian record at all; there is no account of
any plagues of Egypt or of any Pharaoh who was drowned in the Red Sea.

.. _Pharaoh Rameses II: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ramesses_II

Very perplexing is the discovery of a clay tablet written by the Egyptian
governors of a city in Canaan to the `Pharaoh Amenophis IV`_, who came in the
XVIIIth Dynasty before Rameses II, apparently mentioning the Hebrews by name
and declaring that they are overrunning Canaan. Manifestly, if the Hebrews
were conquering Canaan in the time of the XVIIIth Dynasty, they could not
have been made captive and oppressed, before they conquered Canaan, by
Rameses II of the XIXth Dynasty. But it is quite understandable that the
Exodus story, written long after the events it narrates, may have
concentrated and simplified, and perhaps personified and symbolized, what was
really a long and complicated history of tribal invasions. One Hebrew tribe
may have drifted down into Egypt and become enslaved, while the others were
already attacking the outlying Canaanite cities. It is even possible that the
land of the captivity was not Egypt (Hebrew, Misraim), but Misrim in the
north of Arabia, on the other side of the Red Sea. These questions are
discussed fully and acutely in the `Encyclopaedia Biblica`_ (articles *Moses*
and *Exodus)*, to which the curious reader must be referred.\ [#fn1]_

.. _Pharaoh Amenophis IV: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Akhenaten
.. _Encyclopaedia Biblica: http://www.archive.org/search.php?query=Encyclopaedia%20Biblica%20AND%20mediatype%3Atexts

Two other books of the Pentateuch, Deuteronomy and Leviticus, are concerned
with the Law and the priestly rules. The book of Numbers takes up the
wanderings of the Israelites in the desert and their invasion of Canaan.

Whatever the true particulars of the Hebrew invasion of Canaan may be, there
can be no doubt that the country they invaded had changed very greatly since
the days of the legendary promise, made centuries before, to Abraham. Then it
seems to have been largely a Semitic land, with many prosperous trading
cities. But great waves of strange peoples had washed along this coast. We
have already told how the dark Iberian or Mediterranean peoples of Italy and
Greece, the peoples of that Aegean civilization which culminated at Cnossos,
were being assailed by the southward movement of Aryan-speaking races, such
as the Italians and Greeks, and how Cnossos was sacked about 1,400 B.C., and
destroyed altogether about 1,000 B.C. It is now evident that the people of
these Aegean seaports were crossing the sea in search of securer land nests.
They invaded the Egyptian delta and the African coast to the west; they
formed alliances with the Hittites, and other Aryan or Aryanised races. This
happened after the time of Rameses II, in the time of Rameses III. Egyptian
monuments record great sea fights, and also a march of these people along the
coast of Palestine towards Egypt. Their transport was in the ox-carts
characteristic of the Aryan tribes, and it is clear that these Cretans were
acting in alliance with some early Aryan invaders. No connected narrative of
these conflicts that went on between 1,300 B.C. and 1,000 B.C. has yet been
made out, but it is evident from the Bible narrative, that when the Hebrews
under Joshua pursued their slow subjugation of the promised land, they came
against a new people, the Philistines, unknown to Abraham,\ [#fn2]_ who were
settling along the coast in a series of cities of which Gaza, Gath, Ashdod,
Ascalon, and Joppa became the chief, who were really, like the Hebrews, new-
comers, and probably chiefly these Cretans from the sea and from the north.
The invasion, therefore, that began as an attack upon the Canaanites,
speedily became a long and not very successful struggle for the coveted and
promised land with these much more formidable new-comers the Philistines.

It cannot be said that the promised land was ever completely in the grasp of
the Hebrews. Following after the Pentateuch in the Bible come the books of
Joshua, Judges, Ruth (a digression), Samuel I and II, and Kings I and II,
with Chronicles repeating with variation much of the matter of Samuel II and
Kings; there is a growing flavour of reality in most of this latter history,
and in these books we find the Philistines steadfastly in possession of the
fertile lowlands of the south, and the Canaanites and Phoenicians holding out
against the Israelites in the north. The first triumphs of Joshua are not
repeated. The book of Judges is a melancholy catalogue of failures. The
people lose heart. They desert the worship of their own god Jehovah, and
worship Baal and Ashtaroth (= Bel and Ishtar). They mixed their race with the
Philistines, with the Hittites, and so forth, and became, as they have always
subsequently been, a racially mixed people. Under a series of wise men and
heroes they wage a generally unsuccessful and never very united warfare
against their enemies. In succession they are conquered by the Moabites, the
Canaanites, the Midianites, and the Philistines. The story of these
conflicts, of Gideon and of Samson and the other heroes who now and then cast
a gleam of hope upon the distress of Israel, is told in the book of Judges.
In the first book of Samuel is told the story of their great disaster at
Ebenezer in the days when Eli was judge.

This was a real pitched battle in which the Israelites lost 30,000 (!) men.
They had previously suffered a reverse and lost 4,000 men, and then they
brought out their most sacred symbol, the Ark of the Covenant of God.

    «And when the ark of the covenant of the Lord came into the camp, all
    Israel shouted with a great shout, so that the earth rang again. And when the
    Philistines heard the noise of the shout, they said, 'What meaneth the noise
    of this great shout in the camp of the Hebrews?' And they understood that the
    ark of the Lord was come into the camp. And the Philistines were afraid, for
    they said, 'God is come into the camp.' And they said, 'Woe unto us! for
    there hath not been such a thing heretofore. Woe unto us! who shall deliver
    us out of the hand of these mighty Gods? these are the Gods that smote the
    Egyptians with all the plagues in the wilderness. Be strong, and quit
    yourselves like men, O ye Philistines, that ye be not servants unto the
    Hebrews, as they have been to you: quit yourselves like men, and fight.'

    And the Philistines fought, and Israel was smitten, and they fled every
    man into his tent: and there was a very great slaughter for there fell of
    Israel thirty thousand footmen. And the ark of God was taken; and the two
    sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were slain.

    And there ran a man of Benjamin out of the army, and came to Shiloh the
    same day, with his clothes rent, and with earth upon his head. And when he
    came, lo, Eli sat upon a seat by the wayside watching: for his heart trembled
    for the ark of God. And when the man came into the city, and told it, all the
    city, cried out. And when Eli heard the noise of the crying, be said, 'What
    meaneth the noise of this tumult?' And the man came in hastily, and told Eli.
    Now Eli was ninety and eight years old; and his eyes were dim that he could
    not see. And the man said unto Eli, 'I am he that came out of the army, and I
    fled today out of the army.' And he said, 'What is there done, my son?' And
    the messenger answered and said, 'Israel is fled before the Philistines, and
    there hath been, also a great slaughter among the people, and thy two sons
    also, Hophni and Phinehas, are dead, and the ark of God is taken.' And it
    came to pass, when he made mention of the ark of God, that Eli fell from off
    the seat backward, by the side of the gate, and his neck brake, and he died:
    for he was an old man, and heavy. And he had judged Israel forty years.

    And his daughter in law, Phinehas' wife, was with child, near to be
    delivered: and when she heard the tidings that the ark of God was taken, and
    that her father in law and her husband were dead, she bowed herself and
    travailed: for her pains came upon her. And about the time of her death the
    women that stood by her said unto her, 'Fear not, for thou hast borne a son.'
    But she answered not, neither did she regard it. And she named the child
    I-chabod,\ [#fn3]_ saying, 'The glory is departed from Israel': because the ark
    of God was taken, and because of her father in law and her husband.» (I\. Sam., chap. iv.)

The successor of Eli and the last of the judges was Samuel, and at the end of
his rule came an event in the history of Israel which paralleled and was
suggested by the experience of the greater nations around. A king arose. We
are told in vivid language the plain issue between the more ancient rule of
priestcraft and the newer fashion in human affairs. It is impossible to avoid
a second quotation.

    «Then all the elders of Israel gathered themselves together, and came to
    Samuel unto Ramah, and said unto him: 'Behold, thou art old, and thy sons
    walk not in thy ways: now make us a king to judge us like all the nations.'
    
    But the thing displeased Samuel, when they said, 'Give us a king to judge
    us.' And Samuel prayed unto the Lord. And the Lord said unto Samuel, 'Hearken
    unto the voice of the people in all that they say unto thee: for they have
    not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over
    them. According to all the works which they have done since the day that I
    brought them up out of Egypt even unto this day, wherewith they have forsaken
    me, and serve other gods, so do they also unto thee. Now, therefore, hearken
    unto their voice: howbeit yet protest solemnly unto them, and shew them the
    manner of the king that shall reign over them.'
    
    And Samuel told all the words of the Lord unto the people that asked of
    him a king. And he said, 'This will be the manner of the king that shall
    reign over you: He will take your sons, and appoint them for himself, for his
    chariots, and to be his horsemen; and some shall run before his chariots. And
    he will appoint him captains over thousands, and captains over fifties; and
    will set them to ear his ground, and to reap his harvest, and to make his
    instruments of war, and instruments of his chariots. And he will take your
    daughters to be confectioners, and to be cooks, and to be bakers. And he will
    take your fields, and your vineyards, and your oliveyards, even the best of
    them, and give them to his servants. And he will take the tenth of your seed,
    and of your vineyards, and give to his officers, and to his servants. And he
    will take your menservants, and your maidservants, and your goodliest young
    men, and your asses, and put them to his work. He will take the tenth of your
    sheep: and ye shall be his servants. And ye shall cry out in that day because
    of your king which ye shall have chosen you; and the Lord will not hear you
    in that day.'
    
    Nevertheless, the people refused to obey the voice of Samuel; and they
    said, 'Nay; but we will have a king over us; that we also may be like all the
    nations; and that our king may judge us, and go out before us, and fight our
    battles.'» (I\. Sam., chap. viii.)

.. [#fn1] See also G. B. Gray, `A Critical Introduction to the Old Testament <http://www.archive.org/details/criticalintroto00gray>`_.

.. [#fn2] This may seem to contradict Genesis xx. 15, and xxi. and xxvi. various verses, but compare with this the Encyclopaedia Biblica article *Philistines.*

.. [#fn3] That is, where is the glory?

