
19.2 Saul, David, and Solomon
================================================================

But the nature and position of their land was against the Hebrews, and their
first `King Saul`_ was no more successful than their judges. The long
intrigues of the adventurer David against Saul are told in the rest of the
first book of Samuel, and the end of Saul was utter defeat upon Mount Gilboa.
His army was overwhelmed by the Philistine archers.

.. _King Saul: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/King_Saul

    «And it came to pass on the morrow, when the Philistines came to strip the
    slain, that they found Saul and his three sons fallen in Mount Gilboa. And
    they cut off his head, and, stripped off his armour, and sent into the land
    of the Philistines round about, to publish it in the house of their idols,
    and among the people. And they put his armour in the house of Ashtaroth; and
    they fastened his body to the wall of Bethshan.» (I\. Sam., chap. xxxi.)

`David`_ (990 B.C. roughly) was more politic and successful than his
predecessor, and he seems to have placed himself under the protection of
`Hiram`_, King of Tyre. This Phoenician alliance sustained him, and was the
essential element in the greatness of his son Solomon. His story, with its
constant assassinations and executions, reads rather like the history of some
savage chief than of a civilized monarch. It is told with great vividness in
the second book of Samuel.

.. _David: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David
.. _Hiram: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hiram_I

The first book of Kings begins with the reign of `King Solomon`_ (960 B.C.
roughly). The most interesting thing in that story, from the point of view of
the general historian, is the relationship of Solomon to the national
religion and the priesthood, and his dealings with the tabernacle, the priest
Zadok, and the prophet Nathan.

.. _King Solomon: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solomon

The opening of Solomon's reign is as bloody as his father's. The last
recorded speech of David arranges for the murder of Shimei; his last recorded
word is "blood". ?But his hoar head bring thou down to the grave with blood?,
he says, pointing out that though old Shimei is protected by a vow, David had
made to the Lord so long as David lives, there is nothing to bind Solomon in
that matter. Solomon proceeds to murder his brother, who has sought the
throne but quailed and made submission. He then deals freely with his
brother's party. The weak hold of religion upon the racially and mentally
confused Hebrews at that time is shown by the ease with which he replaces the
hostile chief priest by his own adherent Zadok, and still more strikingly by
the murder of Joab by Benaiah, Solomon's chief ruffian, in the tabernacle,
while the victim is claiming sanctuary and holding to the very horns of
Jehovah's altar. Then Solomon sets to work, in what was for that time a
thoroughly modern spirit, to recast the religion of his people. He continues
the alliance with Hiram, King of Sidon, who uses Solomon's kingdom as a high
road by which to reach and build shipping upon the Red Sea, and a hitherto
unheard of wealth accumulates in Jerusalem as a result of this partnership.
Gang labour appears in Israel; Solomon sends relays of men to cut cedarwood
in Lebanon under Hiram, and organizes a service of porters through the land.
(There is much in all this to remind the reader of the relations of some
Central African chief to a European trading concern.) Solomon then builds a
palace for himself, and a temple not nearly as big for Jehovah. Hitherto, the
Ark of the Covenant, the divine symbol of these ancient Hebrews, had abode in
a large tent, which had been shifted from one high place to another, and
sacrifices had been offered to the God of Israel upon a number of different
high places. Now the ark is brought into the golden splendours of the inner
chamber of a temple of cedar-sheathed stone, and put between two great winged
figures of gilded olivewood, and sacrifices are henceforth to be made only
upon the altar before it.

This centralizing innovation will remind the reader of both `Akhnaton <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Akhenaten>`_ and
`Nabonidus`_. Such things as this are done successfully only when the
prestige and tradition and learning of the priestly order has sunken to a
very low level.

.. _Nabonidus: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nabonidus

    «And he appointed, according to the order of David his father, the courses of
    the priests to their service, and the Levites to their charges, to praise and
    minister before the priests, as the duty of every day required; the porters
    also by their courses at every gate; for so had David the man of God
    commanded. And they departed not from the commandment of the king unto the
    priest and Levites concerning any matter, or concerning the treasures.»

Neither Solomon's establishment of the worship of Jehovah in Jerusalem upon
this new footing, nor his vision of and conversation with his God at the
opening of his reign, stood in the way of his developing a sort of
theological flirtatiousness in his declining years. He married widely, if
only for reasons of state and splendour, and he entertained his numerous
wives by sacrificing to their national deities, to the Sidonian goddess
Ashtaroth (Ishtar), to Chemosh (a Moabitish god), to Moloch, and so forth.
The Bible account of Solomon does, in fact, show us a king and a confused
people, both superstitious and mentally unstable, in no way more religious
than any other people of the surrounding world.

A point of considerable interest in the story of Solomon, because it marks a
phase in Egyptian affairs, is his marriage to a daughter of Pharaoh. This
must have been one of the Pharaohs of the XXIst Dynasty. In the great days of
Amenophis III, as the Tel- Amarna letters witness, Pharaoh could condescend
to receive a Babylonian princess into his harem but he refused absolutely to
grant so divine a creature as an Egyptian princess in marriage to the
Babylonian monarch. It points to the steady decline of Egyptian prestige that
now, three centuries later, such a petty monarch as Solomon could wed on
equal terms with an Egyptian princess. There was, however, a revival with the
next Egyptian dynasty (XXII); and the Pharaoh Shishak, the founder, taking
advantage of the cleavage between Israel and Judah, which had been developing
through the reigns of both David and Solomon, took Jerusalem and looted the
all-too-brief splendours both of the new temple and of the king's house.

Shishak seems also to have subjugated Philistia. From this time onward it is
to be noted that the Philistines fade in importance. They had already lost
their Cretan language and adopted that of the Semites they had conquered, and
although their cities remain more or less independent, they merge gradually
into the general Semitic life of Palestine.

There is evidence that the original rude but convincing narrative of
Solomon's rule, of his various murders, of his association with Hiram, of his
palace and temple building, and the extravagances that weakened and finally
tore his kingdom in twain, has been subjected to extensive interpolations and
expansions by a later writer, anxious to exaggerate his prosperity and
glorify his wisdom. It is not the place here to deal with the criticism of
Bible origins, but it is a matter of ordinary common sense rather than of
scholarship to note the manifest reality and veracity of the main substance
of the account of David and Solomon, an account explaining sometimes and
justifying sometimes, but nevertheless relating facts, even the harshest
facts, as only a contemporary or almost contemporary writer, convinced that
they cannot be concealed, would relate them, and then to remark the sudden
lapse into adulation when the inserted passages occur. It is a striking
tribute to the power of the written assertion over realities in men's minds
that this Bible narrative has imposed, not only upon the Christian but upon
the Moslem world, the belief that King Solomon was not only one of the most
magnificent, but one of the wisest of men. Yet the first book of Kings tells
in detail his utmost splendours, and beside the beauty and wonder of the
buildings and organizations of such great monarchs as Thothmes III or Rameses
II or half a dozen other Pharaohs, or of Sargon II or Sardanapalus or
Nebuchadnezzar the Great, they are trivial. His temple measured internally
was twenty cubits broad, about 35 feet\ [#fn4]_ — that is, the breadth of a
small villa residence — and sixty cubits, say 100 feet, long. And as for his
wisdom and statescraft, one need go no further than the Bible to see that
Solomon was a mere helper in the wide-reaching schemes of the trader-king
Hiram, and his kingdom a pawn between Phoenicia and Egypt. His importance was
due largely to the temporary enfeeblement of Egypt, which encouraged the
ambition of the Phoenician and made it necessary to propitiate the holder of
the key to an alternate trade route to the East. To his own people Solomon
was a wasteful and oppressive monarch, and already before his death his
kingdom was splitting, visibly to all men.

With the reign of King Solomon the brief glory of the Hebrews ends; the
northern and richer section of his kingdom, long oppressed by taxation to
sustain his splendours, breaks off from Jerusalem to become the separate
kingdom of Israel, and this split ruptures that linking connection between
Sidon and the Red Sea by which Solomon's gleam of wealth was possible. There
is no more wealth in Hebrew history. Jerusalem remains the capital of one
tribe, the tribe of Judah, the capital of a land of barren hills, cut off by
Philistia from the sea and surrounded by enemies.

The tale of wars, of religious conflicts, of usurpations, assassinations, and
of fratricidal murders to secure the throne goes on for three centuries. It
is a tale frankly barbaric. Israel wars with Judah and the neighbouring
states; forms alliances first with one and then with the other. The power of
Aramean Syria burns like a baleful star over the affairs of the Hebrews, and
then there rises behind it the great, and growing power of the last Assyrian
empire. For three centuries the life of the Hebrews was like the life of a
man who insists upon living in the middle of a busy thoroughfare, and is
consequently being run over constantly by omnibuses and motor-lorries.

"Pul" (apparently the same person as `Tiglath Pileser III <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tiglath_Pileser_III>`_) is, according to
the Bible narrative, the first Assyrian monarch to appear upon the Hebrew
horizon, and Menahem buys him off with a thousand talents of silver (738
B.C.). But the power of Assyria is heading straight for the now aged and
decadent land of Egypt, and the line of attack lies through Judea; Tiglath
Pileser III returns and Shalmaneser follows in his steps, the King of Israel
intrigues for help with Egypt, that "broken reed", and in 721 B.C., as we
have already noted, his kingdom is swept off into captivity and utterly lost
to history. The same fate hung over Judah, but for a little while it was
averted. The fate of Sennacherib's army in the reign of King Hezekiah (701
B.C.), and how he was murdered by his sons (II\. Kings xix. 37), we have
already mentioned. The subsequent subjugation of Egypt by Assyria finds no
mention in Holy Writ, but it is clear that before the reign of Sennacherib,
King Hezekiah had carried on a diplomatic correspondence with Babylon (700
B.C.), which was in revolt against Sargon II of Assyria. There followed the
conquest of Egypt by Esarhaddon, and then for a time Assyria was occupied
with her own troubles; the Scythians and Medes and Persians were pressing her
on the north, and Babylon was in insurrection. As we have already noted,
Egypt, relieved for a time from Assyrian pressure, entered upon a phase of
revival, first under Psammetichus and then under Necho II.

Again the little country in between made mistakes in its alliances. But on
neither side was there safety. Josiah opposed Necho, and was slain at the
battle of Megiddo (608 B.C.). The king of Judah became an Egyptian tributary.
Then when Necho, after pushing as far as the Euphrates, fell before
Nebuchadnezzar II, Judah fell with him (604 B.C.). Nebuchadnezzar, after a
trial of three puppet kings, carried off the greater part of the people into
captivity in Babylon (586 B.C.), and the rest, after a rising and a massacre
of Babylonian officials, took refuge from the vengeance of Chaldea in Egypt.

    «And all the vessels of the house of God, great and small, and the treasures
    of the house of the Lord, and the treasures of the king, and of his princes;
    all these he brought to Babylon. And they burnt the house of God and brake
    down the wall of Jerusalem, and burnt all the palaces thereof with fire, and
    destroyed all the goodly vessels thereof. And them that had escaped from the
    sword carried he away to Babylon; where they were servants to him and his
    sons until the reign of the kingdom of Persia.» (II\. Chron. xxxvi. 18, 19, 20.)

So the four centuries of Hebrew kingship comes to an end. From first to last
it was a mere incident in the larger and greater history of Egypt, Syria,
Assyria, and Phoenicia. But out of it there were now to arise moral and
intellectual consequences of primary importance to all mankind.

.. [#fn4] Estimates of the cubit vary. The greatest is 44 inches. This would extend the width to seventy-odd feet.

