
19.3 The Jews a People of Mixed Origin
================================================================
The Jews who returned, after an interval of more than two generations, to
Jerusalem from Babylonia in the time of `Cyrus`_ were a very different people
from the warring Baal worshippers and Jehovah worshippers, the sacrificers,
in the high places and sacrificers at Jerusalem of the kingdoms of Israel and
Judah. The plain fact of the Bible narrative is that the Jews went to Babylon
barbarians and came back civilized. They went a confused and divided
multitude, with no national self-consciousness; they came back with an
intense and exclusive national spirit. They went with no common literature
generally known to them, for it was only about forty years before the
captivity that King Josiah is said to have discovered ?a book of the law? in
the temple (II. Kings xxii), and, besides that, there is not a hint in the
record of any reading of books; and they returned with most of their material
for the Old Testament. It is manifest that, relieved of their bickering and
murderous kings, restrained from politics and in the intellectually
stimulating atmosphere of that Babylonian world, the Jewish mind made a great
step forward during the Captivity.

It was an age of historical inquiry and learning in Babylonia. The Babylonian
influences that had made `Sardanapalus <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sardanapalus>`_ collect a great library of ancient
writings in Nineveh were still at work. We have already told how `Nabonidus`_
was so preoccupied with antiquarian research as to neglect the defence of his
kingdom against Cyrus. Everything, therefore, contributed to set the exiled
Jews inquiring into their own history, and they found an inspiring leader in
the prophet `Ezekiel <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ezekiel>`_. From such hidden and forgotten records as they had
with them, genealogies, contemporary histories of David, Solomon, and their
other kings, legends and traditions, they made out and amplified their own
story, and told it to Babylon and themselves. The story of the Creation and
the Flood, much of the story of Moses, much of Samson, were probably
incorporated from Babylonian sources.\ [#fn5]_ When the Jews returned to
Jerusalem, only the Pentateuch had been put together into one book, but the
grouping of the rest of the historical books was bound to follow.

.. _Nabonidus: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nabonidus

The rest of their literature remained for some centuries as separate books,
to which a very variable amount of respect was paid. Some of the later books
are frankly post-captivity compositions. Over all this literature were thrown
certain leading ideas. There was an idea, which even these books themselves
gainsay in detail, that all the people were pure-blooded children of Abraham;
there was next an idea of a promise made by Jehovah to Abraham that he would
exalt the Jewish race above all other races; and, thirdly, there was the
belief first of all that Jehovah was the greatest and most powerful of tribal
gods, and then that he was a god above all other gods, and at last that he
was the only true god. The Jews became convinced at last, as a people, that
they were the chosen people of the one God of all the earth.

And arising very naturally out of these three ideas, was a fourth, the idea
of a coming leader, a saviour, a Messiah who would realize the long-postponed
promises of Jehovah.

This welding together of the Jews into one tradition-cemented people in the
course of the "seventy years" is the first instance in history of the new
power of the written word in human affairs. It was a mental consolidation
that did much more than unite the people who returned to Jerusalem. This idea
of belonging to a chosen race predestined to pre-eminence was a very
attractive one. It possessed also those Jews who remained in Babylonia. Its
literature reached the Jews now established in Egypt. It affected the mixed
people who bad been placed in Samaria, the old capital of the kings of Israel
when the ten tribes were deported to Media. It inspired a great number of
Babylonians and the like to claim Abraham as their father, and thrust their
company upon the returning Jews. Ammonites and Moabites became adherents. The
book of Nehemiah is full of the distress occasioned by this invasion of the
privileges of the chosen. The Jews were already a people dispersed in many
lands and cities, when their minds and hopes were unified and they became an
exclusive people. But at first their exclusiveness is merely to preserve
soundness of doctrine and worship, warned by such lamentable lapses as those
of King Solomon. To genuine proselytes of whatever race, Judaism long held
out welcoming arms.

To Phoenicians after the falls of Tyre and Carthage, conversion to Judaism
must have been particularly easy and attractive. Their language was closely
akin to Hebrew. It is possible that the great majority of African and Spanish
Jews are really of Phoenician origin. There were also great Arabian
accessions. In South Russia, as we shall note later, there were even
Mongolian Jews.

.. [#fn5] But one version of the Creation story and the Eden story, though
    originally from Babylon, seem to have been known to the Hebrews before the
    exile. â€”G. W. B.

.. _Cyrus: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyrus_the_Great