
19.4 The Importance of the Hebrew Prophets
================================================================
The historical books from Genesis to Nehemiah, upon which the idea of the
promise to the chosen people had been imposed later, were no doubt the
backbone of Jewish mental unity, but they by no means complete the Hebrew
literature from which finally the Bible was made up. Of such books as Job,
said to be an imitation of Greek tragedy, the Song of Solomon, the Psalms,
Proverbs, and others, there is no time to write in this Outline, but it is
necessary to deal with the books known as "the Prophets" with some fullness.
For those books are almost the earliest and certainly the best evidence of
the appearance of a new kind of leading in human affairs.

These prophets are not a new class in the community; they are of the most
various origins — Ezekiel was of the priestly caste and of priestly sympathies,
and Amos was a shepherd; but they have this in common, that they bring into
life a religious force outside the sacrifices and formalities of priesthood
and temple. The earlier prophets seem most like the earlier priests, they are
oracular, they give advice and foretell events; it is quite possible that at
first, in the days when there were many high places in the land and religious
ideas were comparatively unsettled, there was no great distinction between
priest and prophet. The prophets danced, it would seem, somewhat after the
Dervish fashion, and uttered oracles. Generally they wore a distinctive
mantle of rough goatskin. They kept up the nomadic tradition as against the
"new ways" of the settlement. But after the building of the temple and the
organization of the priesthood the prophetic type remains over and outside
the formal religious scheme. They were probably always more or less of an
annoyance to the priests. They became informal advisers upon public affairs,
denouncers of sin and strange practices, "self-constituted", as we should
say, having no sanction but an inner light. "Now the word of the Lord came
unto" — so, and so; that is the formula.

In the latter and most troubled days of the kingdom of Judah, as Egypt, North
Arabia, Assyria, and then Babylonia closed like a vice upon the land, these
prophets became very significant and powerful. Their appeal was to anxious
and fearful minds, and at first their exhortation was chiefly towards
repentance, the pulling down of this or that high place, the restoration of
worship in Jerusalem, or the like. But through some of the prophecies there
runs already a note like the note of what we call nowadays a "social
reformer". The rich are "grinding the faces of the poor"; the luxurious are
consuming the children's bread; influential and wealthy people make friends
with and imitate the splendours and vices of foreigners, and sacrifice the
common people to these new fashions; and this, is hateful to Jehovah, who
will certainly punish the land.

But with the broadening of ideas that came with the Captivity, the tenor of
prophecy broadens and changes. The jealous pettiness that disfigures the
earlier tribal ideas of God gives place to a now idea of a god of universal
righteousness. It is clear that the increasing influence of prophets was not
confined to the Jewish people; it was something that was going on in those
days all over the Semitic world. The breaking down of nations and kingdoms to
form the great and changing empires of that age, the smashing up of cults and
priesthoods, the mutual discrediting of temple by temple in their rivalries
and disputes — all these influences were releasing men's minds to a freer and
wider religious outlook. The temples had accumulated great stores of golden
vessels and lost their hold upon the imaginations of men. It is difficult to
estimate whether, amidst these constant wars, life had become more uncertain
and unhappy than it had ever been before, but there can be no doubt that men
had become more conscious of its miseries and insecurities. Except for the
weak and the women, there remained little comfort or assurance in the
sacrifices, ritual, and formal devotions of the temples. Such was the world
to which the later prophets of Israel began to talk of the One God, and of a
Promise that some day the world should come to peace and unity and happiness.
This great God that men were now discovering lived in a temple "not made with
hands, eternal in the heavens". There can be little doubt of a great body of
such thought and utterance in Babylonia, Egypt, and throughout the Semitic
east. The prophetic books of the Bible can be but specimens of the
prophesyings of that time . . .

We have already drawn attention to the gradual escape of writing and
knowledge from their original limitation to the priesthood and the temple
precincts, from the shell in which they were first developed and cherished.
We have taken `Herodotus <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Herodotus>`_ as an interesting specimen of what we have called
the free intelligence of mankind. Now here we are dealing with a similar
overflow of moral ideas into the general community. The Hebrew prophets, and
the steady expansion of their ideas towards one God in all the world, is a
parallel development of the free conscience of mankind. From this time onward
there runs through human thought, now weakly and obscurely, now gathering
power, the idea of one rule in the world, and of a promise and possibility of
an active and splendid peace and happiness in human affairs. From being a
temple religion of the old type, the Jewish religion becomes, to a large
extent, a prophetic and creative religion of a new type. Prophet succeeds
prophet. Later on, as we shall tell, there was born a prophet of
unprecedented power, Jesus, whose followers founded the great universal
religion of Christianity. Still later Muhammad, another prophet, appears in
Arabia and founds Islam. In spite of very distinctive features of their own,
these two teachers do in a manner arise out of and in succession to these
Jewish prophets. It is not the place of the historian to discuss the truth
and falsity of religion, but it is his business to record the appearance of
great constructive ideas. Two thousand four hundred years ago, and six or
seven or eight thousand years after the walls of the first Sumerian cities
arose, the ideas of the moral unity of mankind and of a world peace had come
into the world.\ [#fn6]_

.. [#fn6] Fletcher H. Swift's `Education in Ancient Israel from Earliest Times to A.D. 70 <http://www.archive.org/details/educationinancie00swifrich>`_ is an interesting account of the way in which the Jewish religion, because it was a literature-sustained religion, led to the first efforts to provide elementary education for all the children in the community.
