34.1 Christianity and Popular Education
========================================================================
Judged by the map, the three centuries from the beginning of the thirteenth
to, the end of the fifteenth century were an age of recession for Christendom.
These centuries were the Age of the Mongolian peoples. Nomadism from Central
Asia dominated the known world. At the crest of this period there were rulers of
Mongol or the kindred Turkish race and nomadic tradition in China, India,
Persia, Egypt, North Africa, the Balkan peninsula, Hungary, and Russia. The
Ottoman Turk had even taken to the sea, and fought the Venetian upon his own
Mediterranean waters. In 1529 the Turks besieged Vienna, and were defeated
rather by the weather than by the defenders.

The Habsburg empire of Charles V paid the Sultan tribute. It was not until
the battle of Lepanto in 1571, the battle in which Cervantes, the author of Don
Quixote, lost his left arm, that Christendom, to use his words, «broke the pride
of the Osmans and undeceived the world which had regarded the Turkish fleet as
invincible». The sole region of Christian advance was Spain. A man of foresight
surveying the world in the early sixteenth century might well have concluded
that it was only a matter of a few generations before the whole world became
Mongolian-and probably Moslem. Just as to-day most people seem to take it for
granted that European rule and a sort of liberal Christianity are destined to
spread over the whole world. Few people seem to realize how recent a thing is
this European ascendancy. It was only as the fifteenth century drew to its close
that any indications of the real vitality of Western Europe became clearly
apparent.

Our history is now approaching our own times, and our study becomes more and
more a study of the existing state of affairs. The European or Europeanized
system in which the reader is living, is the same system that we see developing
in the crumpled-up, Mongol-threatened Europe of the early fifteenth century. Its
problems then were the embryonic form of the problems of to-day. It is
impossible to discuss that time without discussing our own time. We become
political in spite of ourselves. «Politics without history has no root said Sir
J. R. Seeley; «history without politics has no, fruit».

Let us try, with as much detachment as we can achieve, to discover what the
forces were that were dividing and holding back the energies of Europe during
this tremendous outbreak of the Mongol peoples, and how we are to explain the
accumulation of mental and physical energy that undoubtedly went on during this
phase of apparent retrocession, and which broke out so impressively at its
close.

Now, just as in the Mesozoic Age, while the great reptiles lorded it over the
earth, there were developing in odd out-of-the-way corners those hairy mammals
and feathered birds who were finally to supersede that tremendous fauna
altogether by another far more versatile and capable, so in the limited
territories of Western Europe of the Middle Ages, while the Mongolian monarchies
dominated the world from the Danube to the Pacific and from the Arctic seas to
Madras and Morocco and the Nile, the fundamental lines of a new and harder and
more efficient type of human community were being laid down.

This type of community, which is still only in the phase of formation, which
is still growing and experimental, we may perhaps speak of as the «modern
state». This is, we must recognize a vague expression, but we shall endeavour to
get meaning into it as we proceed. We have noted the appearance of its main root
ideas in the Greek republics and especially in Athens, in the great Roman
republic, in Judaism, in Islam, and in the story of Western Catholicism.
Essentially this modern state, as we see it growing under our eyes to-day, is a
tentative combination (if two apparently contradictory ideas, the idea of *a
community of faith and obedience,* such as the earliest civilizations
undoubtedly were, and the idea of a *community of will)* such as were the
primitive political groupings of' the Nordic and Hunnish peoples. For thousands
of years the settled civilized peoples, who were originally in most cases
dark-white Caucasians, or Dravidian or Southern Mongolian peoples, seem to have
developed their ideas and habits along the line of worship and personal
subjection, and the nomadic peoples theirs along the line of personal
self-reliance and self-assertion. Naturally enough under the circumstances the
nomadic peoples were always supplying the civilizations with fresh rulers and
new aristocracies. That is the rhythm of all early history. It was only after
thousands of years of cyclic changes between refreshment by nomadic conquest,
civilization, decadence, and fresh conquest that the present process of a mutual
blending of «civilized» and «free» tendencies into a new type of community, that
now demands our attention and which is the substance of contemporary history,
began.

We have traced in this history the slow development of larger and larger
«civilized» human communities from the days of the primitive Palæolithic family
tribe. We have seen how the advantages and necessities of cultivation, the fear
of tribal gods, the ideas of the priest-king and the god-king, played their part
in consolidating continually larger and more powerful societies in regions of
maximum fertility. We have watched the interplay of priest, who was usually
native, and monarch, who was usually a conqueror, in these early civilizations,
the development of a written tradition and its escape from priestly control, and
the appearance of novel forces, at first apparently incidental and secondary,
which we have called the free intelligence and the free conscience of mankind.
We have seen the rulers of the primitive civilizations of the river valleys
widening their area and extending their sway, and simultaneously over the less
fertile areas of the earth we have seen mere tribal savagery develop into a more
and more united and politically competent nomadism. Steadily and divergently
mankind pursued one or other of these two lines. For long ages all the
civilizations grew and developed along monarchist lines, upon lines of absolute
monarchy, and in every monarchy and dynasty we have watched, as if it were a
necessary process, efficiency and energy give way to pomp, indolence, and decay,
and finally succumb to some fresher lineage from the desert or the steppe. The
story of the early cultivating civilizations and their temples and courts and
cities bulks large in human history, but it is well to remember that the scene
of that story was never more than a very small part of the land surface of the
globe. Over the greater part of the earth until quite recently, until the last,
two thousand years, the hardier, less numerous tribal peoples of forest and
parkland and the nomadic peoples of the seasonal grasslands maintained and
developed their own ways of life.

The primitive civilizations were, we may say, «communities of obedience»;
obedience to god-kings or kings under gods was their cement; the nomadic
tendency on the other hand has always been towards a different type of
association which we shall here call a «community of will». In a wandering,
fighting community the individual must be at once self-reliant and disciplined.
The chiefs of such communities must be chiefs who are followed, not masters who
compel. This community of will is traceable throughout the entire history of
mankind; everywhere we find the original disposition of all the nomads alike,
Nordic, Semitic, or Mongolian, was individually more willing and more
*erect* than that of the settled folk. The Nordic peoples came into Italy
and Greece under leader kings; they did not bring any systematic temple cults
with them, they found such things in the conquered lands and adapted as they
adopted them. The Greeks and Latins lapsed very easily again into republics, and
so did the Aryans in India. There was a tradition of election also in the early
Frankish and German kingdoms, though the decision was usually taken between
*me* or other members of a royal caste or family. The early Caliphs were
elected, the Judges of Israel and the «kings» of Carthage and Tyre were elected,
and so was the Great Khan of the Mongols until Kublai became a Chinese monarch.
. . . Equally constant in the settled lands do we find the opposite idea, the
idea of a non-elective divinity in kings and of their natural and inherent right
to rule. . . . As our history has developed we have noted the appearance of new
and complicating elements in the story of human societies; we have seen that
nomad turned go-between, the trader appear, and we have noted the growing
importance of shipping in the world. It seems as inevitable that voyaging should
make men free in their minds as that settlement within a narrow horizon should
make men timid and servile. . . . But in spite of all such complications, the
broad antagonism between the method of obedience and the method of will runs
through history down into our own times. To this day their reconciliation is
incomplete.

Civilization even in its most servile forms has always offered much that is
enormously attractive, convenient, and congenial to mankind; but something
restless and untamed in our race has striven continually to convert civilization
from its original reliance upon unparticipating obedience into a community of
participating wills. And to the lurking nomadism in our blood, and particularly
in the blood of monarchs and aristocracies, we must ascribe also that incessant
urgency towards a wider range that forces every state to extend its boundaries
if it can, and to spread its interests to the ends of the earth. The power of
nomadic restlessness that tends to bring all the earth under one rule, seems to
be identical with the spirit that makes most of us chafe under direction and
restraint, and seek to participate in whatever government we tolerate. And this
natural, this temperamental struggle of mankind to reconcile civilization with
freedom has been kept alive age after age by the military and political
impotence of every «community of obedience» that has ever existed. Obedience,
once men are broken to it, can be easily captured and transferred; witness, the
passive role of Egypt, Mesopotamia, and India, the original and typical lands,
of submission, the «cradles of civilization», as they have passed from one
lordship to another. A servile civilization is a standing invitation to
predatory free men. But on the other hand a «community of will» necessitates a
fusion of intractable materials; it is a far harder community to bring about,
and still more difficult to maintain. The story of Alexander the Great displays
the community of will of the Macedonian captains gradually dissolving before his
demand that they should worship him. The incident of the murder of Clitus is
quite typical of the struggle between the free and the servile tradition that
went on whenever a new conqueror from the open lands and the open air found
himself installed in the palace of an ancient monarchy.

In the case of the Roman Republic, history tells of the first big community
of will in the world's history, the first free community much larger than a
city, and how it weakened with growth and spent itself upon success until at
last it gave way to a monarchy of the ancient type, and decayed swiftly into one
of the feeblest communities of servitude that ever collapsed before a handful of
invaders. We have given some attention in this book to the factors in that
decay, because they are of primary importance in human history. One of the most
evident was the want of any wide organization of education to base the ordinary
citizens' minds upon the idea of service and obligation to the republic, to keep
them willing, that is; an other was the absence of any medium of general
information to keep their activities in harmony, to enable them to will as one
body. The community of will is limited in size by the limitations set upon the
possibilities of a community of knowledge. The concentration of property in a
few hands and the replacement of free workers by slaves were rendered possible
by the decay of public spirit and the confusion of the public intelligence that
resulted from these limitations. There was, moreover, no efficient religious
idea behind the Roman state; the dark Etruscan liver-peering cult of Rome was as
little adapted to the political needs of a great community as the very similar
Shamanism of the Mongols. It is in the fact that both Christianity and Islam, in
their distinctive ways, did at least promise to supply, for the first time in
human experience, this patent gap in the Roman republican system as well as in
the nomadic, system, to give a common moral education for a mass of people, and
to supply them with a common history of the past and a common idea of a human
purpose and destiny, that their enormous historical importance lies. Aristotle,
as we have noted, had set a limit to the ideal community of a few thousand
citizens, because he could not conceive how a larger multitude could he held
together by a common idea. He had had no experience of any sort of education
beyond the tutorial methods of his time. Greek education was almost purely
*viva-voce* education; it could reach therefore only to a limited
aristocracy. Both the Christian church and Islam demonstrated the unsoundness of
Aristotle's limitation. We may think they did their task of education in their
vast fields of opportunity crudely or badly, but the point of interest to us is
that they did it at all. Both sustained almost world-wide propagandas of idea
and inspiration. Both relied successfully upon the power of the written word to
link great multitudes of diverse men together in common enterprises. By the
eleventh century, as we have seen, the idea of Christendom had been imposed upon
all the vast warring miscellany of the smashed and pulverized Western empire,
and upon Europe far beyond its limits, as a uniting and inspiring idea. It had
made a shallow but effective community of will over an unprecedented area and
out of an unprecedented multitude of human beings. Only one other thing at all
like this had ever happened to any great section of mankind before, and that was
the idea of a community of good behaviour that the *literati* had spread
throughout China.\ [#fn2]_ 

The Catholic Church provided what the Roman Republic had lacked, a system of
popular teaching, a number of universities and methods of intellectual
inter-communication. By this achievement it opened the way to the new
possibilities of human government that now become apparent in this Outline,
possibilities that are still being apprehended and worked out in the world in
which we are living. Hitherto the government of states had been either
authoritative, under some uncriticized and unchallenged combination of priest
and monarch, or it had been a democracy, uneducated and uninformed, degenerating
with any considerable increase of size, as Rome and Athens did, into a mere rule
by mob and politician. But by the thirteenth century the first intimations had
already dawned of an ideal of government which is still making its way to
realization, the modern ideal, the ideal of a world-wide educational government,
in which the ordinary man is neither the slave of an absolute monarch nor of a
demagogue-ruled state, but an informed, inspired, and consulted part of his
community. It is upon the word educational that stress must be laid, and upon
the idea that information must precede consultation. It is in the practical
realization of this idea that education is a collective function and not a
private affair that one essential distinction of the «modern state» from any of
its precursors lies. The modern citizen men are coming to realize, must be
informed first and then consulted. Before he can vote he must hear the evidence;
before he can decide he must know. It is not by setting up polling booths, but
by setting up schools and making literature and knowledge and news universally
accessible that the way is opened from servitude and confusion to that willingly
co-operative state which is the modern ideal. Votes in themselves are worthless
things. Men had votes in Italy in the time of the Gracchi. Their votes did not
help them. Until a man has education, a vote is a useless and dangerous thing
for him to possess. The ideal community towards which we move is not a community
of will simply; it is *a community of knowledge and will,* replacing *a
community of faith and obedience.* Education is the adapter which will make
the nomadic spirit of freedom and self-reliance compatible with the
co-operations and wealth and security of civilization.

.. [#fn2] But the Jews were already holding their community together by systematic education at least as early as the beginning of the Christian era.
