
34.11.1 The Life of Emperor Charles V
========================================================================

.. _Figure 756:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0756.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0756.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 756

    Figure 756: Map — Europe in the time of Charles V

Most of the figures that stand out in history, do so through some exceptional
personal quality, good or bad, that makes them more significant than their
fellows. But there was born at Ghent in Belgium in 1500 a man of commonplace
abilities and melancholy temperament, the son of a mentally defective mother who
had been married for reasons of state, who was through no fault of his own to
become the focus of the accumulating stresses of Europe. The historian must give
him a quite unmerited and accidental prominence side by side with such marked
individualities as Alexander and Charlemagne and Frederick II. This was the
Emperor Charles V. For a time be had an air of being the greatest monarch in
Europe since Charlemagne. Both he and his illusory greatness were the results of
the matrimonial statecraft of his grandfather, the Emperor Maximilian I (born
1459, died 1519).

Some families have fought, others have intrigued their way to world power;
the Habsburg married their way. Maximilian began his career with the inheritance
of the Habsburgs, Austria, Styria, part of Alsace and other districts; he
married the lady's name scarcely matters to us-the Netherlands and Burgundy.
Most of Burgundy slipped from him after his first wife's death, but the
Netherlands he held. Then he tried unsuccessfully to marry Brittany. He became
Emperor in succession to his father, Frederick III, in 1493, and married the
duchy of Milan. Finally he married his son to the weak minded daughter of
Ferdinand and Isabella, the Ferdinand and Isabella of Columbus, who not only
reigned over a freshly united Spain, and over Sardinia and the kingdom of the
two Sicilies, but by virtuue of the papal gifts to Castile, over all America
west of Brazil. So, it was that Charles, his grandson, inherited most of the
American continent and between a third and a half of what the Turks had left of
Europe. The father of Charles died in 1506, and Maximilian did his best to
secure his grandson's election to the imperial throne.

Charles succeeded to the Netherlands in 1506; he became practically king of
the Spanish dominions, big mother being imbecile, when his grandfather Ferdinand
died in 1516; and his grandfather Maximilian dying in 1519, he was in 1520
elected Emperor at the still comparatively tender age of twenty.

His election as Emperor was opposed by the young and brilliant French King,
Francis I, who had succeeded to the French throne in 1515 at the age of
twenty-one. The candidature of Francis was supported by Leo X (1513), who also
requires from us the epithet brilliant. It was indeed an age of brilliant
monarchs. It was the age of Baber in India (1526-1530) and Suleiman in Turkey
(1520). Both Leo and Francis dreaded the concentration of so much power in the
hands of one man as the election of Charles threatened. The only other monarch
who seemed to matter in Europe was Henry VIII, who had become King of England in
1509 at the age of eighteen. He also offered himself as a candidate for the
empire, and the imaginative English reader may amuse himself by working out the
possible consequences of such an election.

There was much scope for diplomacy in this triangle of kings. Charles on his
way from Spain to Germany visited England and secured the support of Henry
against Francis by bribing his minister, Cardinal Wolsey. Henry also made a
great parade of friendship with Francis; there was feasting, tournaments, and
such-like antiquated gallantries in France, in a courtly picnic known to
historians as the Field of the Cloth of Gold (1520). Knighthood was becoming a
picturesque affectation in the sixteenth century. The Emperor Maximilian I is
still called «the last of the knights» by German historians.

The election of Charles was secured, it is to be noted, by a vast amount of
bribery. He had as his chief supporters and creditors the great German business
house of the Fuggers. That large treatment of money and credit which we call
finance, which had gone out of European political life with the collapse of the
Roman Empire, was now coming back to power. This appearance of the Fuggers,
whose houses and palaces outshone those of the emperors, marks the upward
movement of forces that had begun two or three centuries earlier in Cahors in
France and in Florence and other Italian towns. Money, public debts, and social
unrest and discontent re-enter upon the miniature stage of this *Outline.*
Charles V was not so much a Habsburg as a Fugger emperor.

.. _Figure 757:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0757.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0757.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 757

    Figure 757: Luther 

    (after Cranach)

For a time this fair, not very intelligent-looking young man with the thick
upper lip and long, clumsy chin-features which still afflict his descendants-was
largely a puppet in the hands of his ministers. Able servants after the order of
Machiavelli guided him at first in the arts of kingship. Then in a slow but
effectual way he began to assert himself. He was confronted at the very outset
of his reign in Germany with the perplexing dissensions of Christendom. The
revolt against the papal rule which had been going on since the days of Huss and
Wycliffe had been recently exasperated by a new and unusually cynical selling of
indulgences to raise money for the completion of St. Peter's at Rome. A monk
named Luther, who had been consecrated as a priest, who had taken to reading the
Bible, and who, while visiting Rome on the business of his order, had been much
shocked by the levity and worldly splendour of the Papacy, had come forward
against these papal expedients at Wittenberg (1517), offering disputation and
propounding certain theses. An important controversy ensued. At first Luther
carried on this controversy in Latin, but presently took to German, and speedily
had the people in a ferment. Charles found this dispute raging when he came from
Spain to Germany. He summoned an assembly or «diet» of the empire at Worms on
the Rhine. To this, Luther, who had been asked to recant his views by Pope Leo
X, and who had refused to do so, was summoned. Ile came, and, entirely in the
spirit of Huss, refused to recant unless he was convinced of his error by
logical argument or the authority of Scripture. But his protectors among the
princes were too powerful for him to suffer the fate of John Huss.

Here was a perplexing situation for the young Emperor. There is reason to
suppose that he was inclined at first to support Luther against the Pope. Leo X
had opposed the election of Charles, and was friendly with his rival, Francis I.
But Charles V was not a good Machiavellian, and he had acquired in Spain a
considerable religious sincerity. He decided against Luther. Many of the German
princes, and especially the Elector of Saxony, sided with the reformer. Luther
went into hiding under the protection of the Saxon Elector, and Charles found
himself in the presence of the opening rift that was to split Christendom into
two contending camps.

Close upon these disturbances, and probably connected with them, came a
widespread peasants' revolt throughout Germany. This outbreak frightened Luther
very effectually. He was shocked by its excesses, and from that time forth the
Reformation he advocated ceased to be a Reformation according to the people and
became a Reformation according to the princes. He lost his confidence in that
free judgment for which he had stood up so manfully.

.. _Figure 759:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0759.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0759.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 759

    Figure 759: Francis I

Meanwhile Charles realized that his great empire was in very serious danger
both from the west and from the east. On the west of him was his spirited rival,
Francis I; to the east was the Turk in Hungary, in alliance with Francis and
clamouring for certain arrears of tribute from the Austrian dominions. Charles
had the money and army of Spain at his disposal, but it was extremely difficult
to get any effective support in money from Germany. His grandfather had
developed a German infantry on the Swiss model, very much upon the lines
expounded in Machiavelli's Art of 'War, but these troops had to be paid and his
imperial subsidies had to be supplemented by unsecured borrowings, which were
finally to bring his supporters, the Fuggers, to ruin.

On the whole, Charles, in alliance with Henry VIII, was successful against
Francis I and the Turk. Their chief battlefield was north Italy; the generalship
was dull on both sides; their advances and retreats depended chiefly on the
arrival of reinforcements. The German army invaded France, failed to take
Marseilles, fell back into Italy, lost Milan, and was besieged in Pavia. Francis
I made a long and unsuccessful siege of Pavia, was caught by fresh German
forces, defeated, wounded, and taken prisoner. He sent back a message to his
queen that all was «lost but honour», made a humiliating peace, and broke it as
soon as he was liberated, so that even the salvage of honour was but temporary.
Henry VIII and the Pope, in obedience to the rules of Machiavellian strategy,
now went over to the side of France in order to prevent Charles becoming too
powerful. The German troops in Milan, under the Constable of Bourbon, being
unpaid, forced rather than followed their commander into a raid upon Rome. They
stormed the city and' pillaged it (1527). The Pope took refuge in the Castle of
St. Angelo while the looting and slaughter went on. He bought off the German
troops at last by the payment of four hundred thousand ducats.

.. _Figure 760:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0760.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0760.png
    :figclass: inline-figure left
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 760

    Figure 760: Henry VIII

Ten years of such stupid and confused fighting impoverished all Europe and
left the Emperor in possession of Milan. In 1530 he was crowned by the Pope-he
was the last German Emperor to be crowned by the Pope-at Bologna. One thinks of
the rather dull-looking blonde face, with its long lip and chin, bearing the
solemn expression of one who endures a doubtful though probably honourable
ceremony.

Meanwhile the Turks were making great headway in Hungary. They had defeated
and killed the King of Hungary in 1526, they held Buda-Pesth, and in 1529, as we
have already noted, Suleiman the Magnificent very nearly took Vienna. The
Emperor was greatly concerned by these advances, and did his utmost to drive
back the Turks, but he found the greatest, difficulty in getting the German
princes to unite even with this formidable enemy upon their very borders.
Francis I remained implacable for a time, and there was a now French war; but in
1538 Charles won his rival over to a more friendly attitude by ravaging the
south of France. Francis and Charles then formed an alliance against the Turk,
but the Protestant princes, the German princes who were resolved to break away
from Rome had formed a league, the Schmalkaldic League (named after the little
town of Schmalkalden in Hesse, at which its constitution was arranged), against
the Emperor, and in the place of a great campaign to recover Hungary for
Christendom Charles had to turn his mind to the gathering internal struggle in
Germany. Of that struggle he saw only the opening war. It was a struggle, a
sanguinary irrational bickering of princes for ascendancy, now flaming into war
and destruction, now sinking back to intrigues and diplomacies; it was a snake's
sack of Machiavellian policies, that was to go on writhing incurably right into
the nineteenth century, and to waste and desolate Central Europe again and
again.

The Emperor never seems to have grasped the true forces at work in these
gathering troubles. He was for his time and station an exceptionally worthy man,
and he seems to have taken the religious dissensions that were tearing Europe
into warring fragments as genuine theological differences. He gathered diets and
councils in futile attempts at reconciliation. Formulae and confessions were
tried over. The student of German history must struggle with the details of the
Religious Peace of Nuremberg, the settlement at the diet of Ratisbon, the
Interim of Augsburg, and the like. Here we do but mention them as details in the
worried life of this culminating emperor. As a matter of fact, hardly one of the
multifarious princes and rulers in Europe seems to have been acting in good
faith. The wide-spread religious trouble of the world, the desire of the common
people for truth and social righteousness, he spreading knowledge of the time
all those things were merely counters in the imaginations of princely diplomacy.
Henery VII of England, who had begun his career with a book written against
heresy, and who had been rewarded by the Pope with the title of «Defender of the
Faith», being anxious to divorce his first wife in favour of an animated young
lady named Anne Boleyn,\ [#fn14]_  and wishing also to turn against the Emperor in
favour of Francis I and to loot the vast wealth of the church in England, joined
the company of Protestant princes in 1530. Sweden, Denmark, and Norway had
already gone over to the Protestant side.

.. _Figure 761:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0761.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0761.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 761

    Figure 761: Charles V

The German religious war began in 1546, a few months after the death of
Martin Luther. We need not trouble about the incidents of the campaign. The
Protestant Saxon army was badly beaten at Lochau. By something very like a
breach of faith Philip of Hesse, the Emperor's chief remaining antagonist, was
caught and imprisoned, and the Turks were bought off by the payment of an annual
tribute. In 1547, to the great relief of the Emperor, Francis I died. So by 1547
Charles got to a kind of settlement, and made his last efforts to effect peace
where there was no peace.

In 1552 all Germany was at war again, only a precipitate flight from
Innsbruck saved Charles from capture, and in 1552, with the treaty of Passau,
came another unstable equilibrium. Charles was now utterly weary of the cares
and splendours of empire; he had never had a very sound constitution, he was
naturally indolent, and he was suffering greatly from gout. He abdicated. He
made over all his sovereign rights in Germany to his brother Ferdinand, and
Spain and the Netherlands he resigned to his son Philip. He then retired to a
monastery at Yuste, among the oak and chestnut forests in the hills to the north
of the Tagus valley, and there he died in 1568.

Much has been written in a sentimental vein of this retirement, this
renunciation of the world by this tired majestic Titan, world-weary, seeking in
an austere solitude his peace with God. But his retreat was neither solitary nor
austere; he had with him nearly a hundred and fifty attendants; his
establishment had all the indulgences without the fatigues of a court, and
Philip II was a dutiful son to whom his father's advice was a command. As for
his austerities, let Prescott witness: «In the almost daily correspondence
between Quixada, or Gaztelu, and the Secretary of State at Valladolid, there is
scarcely a letter that does not turn more, or less on the Emperor's eating or
his illness. The one seems naturally to follow, like a running commentary, on
the other. It is rare that such topics have formed the burden of communications
with the department of state. It must have been no easy matter for the secretary
to preserve his gravity in the perusal of despatches in which politics and
gastronomy were so strangely mixed together. The courier from Valladolid to
Lisbon was ordered to make a detour, so as to take Jarandilla in his route, and
bring supplies for the royal table. On Thursdays he was to bring fish to serve
for the *jour maigre* that was to follow. The trout in the neighbourhood
Charles thought too small; so others, of a larger size, were to be sent from
Valladolid. Fish of every kind was to his taste, as indeed, was anything that in
its nature or habits at all approached to fish. Eels, frogs, oysters, occupied
an important place in the royal bill of fare. Potted fish, especially anchovies,
found great favour with him; and he regretted that he had not brought a better
supply of these from the Low Countries. On an eel-pasty be particularly doted. .
. .\ [#fn15]_ 

In 1554 Charles had obtained a bull from Pope Julius III granting him a
dispensation from fasting, and allowing him to break his fast early in the
morning even when he was to take the sacrament.

«That Charles was not altogether unmindful of his wearing apparel in Yuste,
may be inferred from the fact that his wardrobe contained no less than sixteen
robes of silk and velvet, lined with ermine, or eider down, or the soft hair of
the Barbary goat. As to the furniture and upholstery of his apartments, how
little reliance is to be placed on the reports so carelessly circulated about
these may be gathered from a single glance at the inventory of his effects,
prepared by Quixada and Gaztelu soon after their master's death. Among the items
we find carpets from Turkey and Alcarez, canopies of velvet and other stuffs,
hangings of fine black -cloth, which since his mother's death he had always
chosen for his own bedroom; while the remaining apartments were provided with no
less than twenty-five suits of tapestry, from the looms of Flanders, richly
embroidered with figures of animals and with landscapes». . . . «Among the
different pieces of plate we find some of pure gold, and others especially noted
for their curious workmanship; and as this was an age in which the art of
working the precious metals was carried to, the highest perfection, we cannot
doubt that some of the finest specimens had come into the Emperor's possession,
The whole amount of plate was estimated at between twelve and thirteen thousand
ounces, in weight». . . .\ [#fn16]_ 

Charles had never acquired the habit of reading, but be would be read aloud
to at meals after the fashion of Charlemagne, and would make what one narrator
describes as a «sweet and heavenly commentary». He also amused himself with
technical toys, by listening to music or sermons, and by attending to the
imperial business that still came drifting in to him. The death of the Empress,
to whom he was greatly attached, had turned his mind towards religion, which in
his case took a punctilious and ceremonial form; every Friday in Lent he
scourged himself with the rest of the monks with such good will as to draw
blood.

These exercises and the gout released a bigotry in Charles that had-been
hitherto restrained by considerations of policy. The appearance of Protestant
teaching close at hand in Valladolid roused him to fury. «Tell the grand
inquisitor and his council from me to be at their posts, and to lay the axe at
the root of the evil before it spreads further». . . . He expressed a doubt
whether it would not be well, in so black an affair, to dispense with the
ordinary course of justice, and to show no mercy; «lest the criminal, if
pardoned, should have the opportunity of repeating his crime». He recommended,
as an example, his own mode of proceeding in the Netherlands, «where all who
remained obstinate in their errors were burned alive, and those who were
admitted to penitence were beheaded».

Among the chief pleasures of the Catholic monarch between meals during this
time of retirement were funeral services. He not only attended every actual
funeral that was celebrated at Yuste, but he had services conducted for the
absent dead, he held a funeral service in memory of his wife on the anniversary
of her death, and finally he celebrated his own obsequies. «The chapel was hung
with black, and the blaze of hundreds of wax-lights was scarcely sufficient to
dispel the darkness. The brethren in their conventual dress, and all the
Emperor's household clad in deep mourning, gathered round a huge catafalque,
shrouded also in black, which had been raised in the centre of the chapel. The
service for the burial of the dead was then performed; and amidst the dismal
wail of the monks, the prayers ascended for the departed spirit that it might be
received into the mansions of the blessed. The sorrowful attendants were melted
to tears, as the image of their master's death was presented to their minds-or
they were touched, it maybe, with compassion by this pitiable display of
weakness. Charles, muffled in a dark mantle, and bearing a lighted candle in his
hand, mingled with his household, the spectator of his own obsequies; and the
doleful ceremony was concluded by his placing the taper in the hands of the
priest, in sign of his surrendering up his soul to the Almighty».

Other accounts make Charles wear a shroud and lie in the coffin, remaining
there alone until the last mourner had left the chapel.

Within two months of this masquerade he was dead. And the greatness of the
Holy Roman Empire died with him. The Holy Roman Empire struggled on indeed to
the days of Napoleon, but as an invalid and dying thing.

.. [#fn14]  But he had a better reason for doing this in the fact that there was no heir to the throne. The Wars of the Roses, a bitter dynastic war, were still very vivid in the minds of English people. —F. I. L. H.
.. [#fn15]  Prescott’s Appendix to Robertson’s :t:`History of Charles V`.
.. [#fn16]  Prescott.
