
34.2 Europe Begins to Think for Itself
========================================================================
But though it is certain that the Catholic Church, through its Propagandas,
its popular appeals, its schools and universities, opened up the prospect of the
modern educational state in Europe, it is equally certain that the Catholic
Church never intended to do anything of the sort. It did not send out knowledge
with its blessing; it let it loose inadvertently. It was not the Roman Republic
whose heir the Church esteemed itself, but the Roman Emperor. Its conception of
education was not release, not an invitation to participate, but the subjugation
of minds. Two of the greatest educators of the Middle Ages were indeed not
churchmen at all, but monarchs and statesmen, Charlemagne and Alfred the Great
of England, who made use of the church organization. But it was the church that
had provided the organization. Church and monarchs in their mutual grapple for
power were both calling to their aid the thoughts of the common man. In response
to these conflicting appeals appeared the common man, the unofficial outside
independent man thinking for himself.

Already in the thirteenth century we have seen Pope Gregory IX and the
Emperor Frederick II engaging in a violent public controversy. Already then
there was a sense that a new arbitrator greater than pope or monarchy had come
into the world, that there were readers and a public opinion. The exodus of the
popes to Avignon, and the divisions and disorders of the Papacy during the
fourteenth century, stimulated this free judgment upon authority throughout
Europe enormously.

At first the current criticism upon the church concerned only moral and
material things. The wealth and luxury of the higher clergy and the heavy papal
taxation were the chief grounds of complaint. And the earlier attempts to
restore Christian simplicity, the foundation of the Franciscans, for example,
were not movements of separation, but movements of revival. Only later did a
deeper and more distinctive criticism develop which attacked the central fact of
the church's teaching and the justification of priestly importance; namely, the
sacrifice of the mass.

We have sketched in broad outlines the early beginnings of Christianity, and
we have shown how rapidly that difficult and austere conception of the Kingdom
of God, which was the central idea of the teachings of Jesus of Nazareth, was
overlaid by a revival of the ancient sacrificial idea, a doctrine more difficult
indeed to grasp, but easier to reconcile with the habits and dispositions and
acquiescences of everyday life in the Near East. We have noted how a sort of
theocrasia went on between Christianity and Judaism and the cult of the
Serapeum, and Mithraism and other competing cults, by which the Mithraist
Sunday, the Jewish idea of blood as a religious essential, the Alexandrian
importance of the Mother of God, the shaven and fasting priest, self-tormenting
asceticism, and many other matters of belief and ritual and practice, became
grafted upon the developing religion. These adaptations, no doubt, made the new
teaching much more understandable and acceptable in Egypt and Syria and the
like. They were things in the way of thought of the dark-white Mediterranean
race; they were congenial to that type. But as we have shown in our story of
Muhammad, these acquisitions did not make Christianity more acceptable to the
Arab nomads; to them these features made it disgusting. And so, too, the robed
and shaven monk and nun and priest seem to have roused something like an
instinctive hostility in the Nordic barbarians of the North and West. We have
noted the peculiar bias of the early Anglo-Saxons and Northmen against the monks
and nuns. They seem to have felt that the lives and habits of these devotees
were queer and unnatural.

The clash between what we may call the «dark-white» factors and the newer
elements in Christianity was no doubt intensified by Pope Gregory VII's
imposition of celibacy upon the Catholic priests in the eleventh century. The
East had known religious celibates for thousands of years; in the West they were
regarded with scepticism and suspicion.

And now in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, as the lay mind of the
Nordic peoples began to acquire learning, to read and write and express itself,
and as it came into touch with the stimulating activities of the Arab mind, we
find a much more formidable criticism of Catholicism beginning, an intellectual
attack upon the priest as priest, and upon the ceremony of the mass as the
central fact of the religious life, coupled with a demand for a return to the
personal teachings of Jesus as recorded in the Gospels.

We have already mentioned the career of the Englishman Wycliffe (c.
1320-1384), and how he translated the Bible into English in order to set up a
counter authority to that of the Pope. He denounced the doctrines of the church
about the mass as disastrous error, and particularly the teaching that the
consecrated bread eaten in that ceremony becomes in some magical way the actual
body of Christ. We will not pursue the question of transubstantiation, as this
process of the mystical change of the elements in the sacrament is called into
its intricacies. These are matters for the theological specialist. But it will
be obvious that any doctrine, such as the Catholic doctrine, which makes the
consecration of the elements in the sacrament a miraculous process performed by
the priest, and only to be performed by the priest, and which makes the
sacrament the central necessity of the religious system, enhances the importance
of the priestly order enormously. On the other hand, the view, which was the
typical «Protestant» view, that this sacrament is a mere eating of bread and
drinking of wine as a personal remembrance of Jesus of Nazareth, does away at
last with any particular need for a consecrated priest at all. Wycliffe himself
did not go to this extremity; he was a priest, and he remained a priest to the
end of his life, be held that God was spiritually if not substantially present
in the consecrated bread, but his doctrine raised a question that carried men
far beyond his positions. From the point of view of the historian, the struggle
against Rome that Wycliffe opened became very speedily a struggle of what one
may call rational or layman's religion making its appeal to the free
intelligence and the free conscience in mankind, against authoritative,
traditional, ceremonial, and priestly religion. The ultimate tendency of this
complicated struggle was to strip Christianity as bare as Islam of every vestige
of ancient priestcraft, to revert to the Bible documents as authority, and to
recover, if possible, the primordial teachings of Jesus. Most of its issues are
still undecided among Christians to this day.

Wycliffe's writings had nowhere more influence than in Bohemia. About 1396 a
learned Czech, John Huss, delivered a series of lectures in the university of
Prague based upon the doctrines of the great Oxford teacher. Huss became rector
of the university, and his teachings roused the church to excommunicate him
(1412). This was at the time of the Great Schism, just before the Council of
Constance (1414-1418) gathered to discuss the scandalous disorder of the church.
We have already told how the schism was ended by the election of Martin V. The
council aspired to reunite Christendom completely. But the methods by which it
sought this reunion jar with our modern consciences. Wycliffe's bones were
condemned to be burnt. Huss was decoyed to Constance under promise of a safe
conduct, and he was then put upon his trial for heresy. He was ordered to recant
certain of his opinions. He replied that he could not recant until he was
convinced of his error. He was told that it was his duty to recant if his
superiors required it of him, whether he was convinced or not. He refused to
accept this view. In spite of the Emperor's safe conduct, he was burnt alive
(1415), a martyr not for any specific doctrine, but for the free intelligence
and free conscience of mankind.

It would be impossible to put the issue between priest and anti-priest more
clearly than it was put at this trial of John Huss, nor to demonstrate more
completely the evil spirit in priestcraft. A colleague of Huss, Jerome of
Prague, was burnt in the following year.

These outrages were followed by an insurrection of the Hussites in Bohemia
(1419), the first of a series of religious wars that marked the breaking-up of
Christendom. In 1420 the Pope, Martin V, issued a bull proclaiming a crusade
«for the destruction of the Wycliffites, Hussites, and all other heretics in
Bohemia», and attracted by this invitation the unemployed soldiers of fortune
and all the drifting blackguardism of Europe converged upon that valiant
country. They found in Bohemia, under its great leader Ziska, more hardship and
less loot than crusaders were disposed to face. The Hussites were conducting
their -affairs upon extreme democratic lines, and the whole country was aflame
with enthusiasm. The crusaders beleaguered Prague, but failed to take it, and
they experienced a series of reverses that ended in their retreat from Bohemia.
A second crusade (1421) was no more successful. Two other crusades failed. Then
unhappily the Hussites fell into internal dissensions. Encouraged by this, a
fifth crusade (1431) crossed the frontier under Frederick Margrave of
Brandenburg.

The army of these crusaders, According to the lowest estimates, consisted of
90,000 infantry and 40,000 horsemen. Attacking Bohemia from the west, they first
laid siege to the town of Tachov, but failing to capture the strongly fortified
city, they stormed the little town of Most, and here, as well as in the
surrounding country, committed the most horrible atrocities on a population a
large part of which was entirely innocent of any form of theology whatever. The
crusaders, advancing by slow marches, penetrated further into Bohemia, till they
reached the neighbourhood of the town of Domazlice (Tauss). «It was at three
o'clock on August 14th, 1431, that the crusaders, who where encamped in the
plain between Domazlice and Horsuv Tyn, received the news that the Hussites,
under the leadership of Prokop the Great, were approaching. Though the Bohemians
were still four miles off, the rattle of their war-wagons and the song, 'All ye
warriors of God,' which their whole host was chanting, could already be heard».
The enthusiasm of the crusaders evaporated with astounding rapidity. Lützow\ [#fn3]_ 
describes how the papal representative and the Duke of Saxony ascended a
convenient hill to inspect the battlefleld. It was, they discovered, not going
to be a battlefield.

The German camp was in utter confusion. Horsemen were streaming off in every
direction, and the clatter of empty wagons being driven off almost drowned the
sound of that terrible singing. The crusaders were abandoning even their loot.
Came a message from the Margrave of Brandenburg advising flight; there was no
holding any of their troops. They were dangerous now only to their own side, and
the papal representative spent an unpleasant night hiding from them in the
forest. . . . So ended the Bohemian crusade.

In 1434 civil war again broke out, among the Hussites, in which the extreme
and most valiant section was defeated, and in 1436 an agreement was patched up
between the Council of Basle and the moderate Hussites, in which the Bohemian
church was allowed to retain certain distinctions from the general Catholic
practice, which held good until the German Reformation in the sixteenth
century.

.. [#fn3] Lützow’s :t:`Bohemia`
