
34.5 Protestantism of the Princes and Protestantism of the Peoples
========================================================================
Here we devote a section to certain elementary statements about the movement
in men's religious ideas during the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. They are
a necessary introduction to the political history of the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries that follows.

We have to distinguish clearly between two entirely different systems of
opposition to the Catholic church. They intermingled very confusingly. The
church was losing its hold upon the consciences of princes and rich and able
people; it was also losing the faith and confidence of common people. The effect
of its decline of spiritual power upon the former class was to make them resent
its interference, its moral restrictions, its claims to overlordship, its claim
to tax, and to dissolve allegiances. They ceased to respect its power and its
property. This insubordination of princes and rulers was going on throughout the
Middle Ages, but it was only when in the sixteenth century the church began to
side openly with its old antagonist the Emperor, when it offered him its support
and accepted his help in its campaign against heresy, that princes began to
think seriously of breaking away from the Roman communion and setting up
fragments of a church. And they would never have done so if they had not
perceived that the hold of the church upon the masses of mankind had
relaxed.

The revolt of the princes was essentially an irreligious revolt against the
world-rule of the church. The Emperor Frederick III with his epistles to his
fellow princes, was its forerunner. The revolt of the people against the church,
on the other hand, was as essentially religious. They objected not to the
church's power, but to its weaknesses. They wanted a deeply righteous and
fearless church to help them and organize them against the wickedness of
powerful men. Their movements against the church, within it and without, were
movements not for release from a religious control, but for a fuller and more
abundant religious control. They did not want less religious control, but
more-but they wanted to be assured that it was religious. They objected to the
Pope not because he was the religious head of the world, but because he was not;
because he was a wealthy earthly prince when he ought to have been their
spiritual leader.

The contest in Europe from the fourteenth century onward therefore was a
three-cornered contest. The princes wanted to use the popular forces against the
Pope, but not to let those forces grow too powerful for their own power and
glory. For a long time the church went from prince to prince for an ally without
realizing that the lost ally it needed to recover was popular veneration.

Because of this triple aspect of the mental and moral conflicts that were
going on in the fourteenth and fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, the series of
ensuing changes, those changes that are known collectively in history as the
Reformation, took on, a threefold aspect. There was the Reformation according to
the princes, who wanted to stop the flow of money to Rome and to seize the moral
authority, the educational power, and the material possessions of the church
within their dominions. There was the Reformation according to the people, who
sought to make Christianity a power against unrighteousness, and particularly
against the unrighteousness of the rich and powerful. And finally there was the
Refomation within the church, of which St. Francis of Assisi was the precursor,
which sought to restore the goodness of the church and, through its goodness, to
restore its power.

The Reformation according to the princes took the form of a replacement of
the Pope by the prince as the head of the religion and the controller of the
consciences of his people. The princes had no idea and no intention of letting
free the judgments of their subjects more particularly with the object-lessons
of the Hussites and the Anabaptists before their eyes; they sought to establish
national churches dependent upon the throne. As England, Scotland, Sweden,
Norway, Denmark, North Germany, and Bohemia broke away from the Roman communion,
the princes and other ministers showed the utmost solicitude to keep the
movement well under control. Just as much reformation as would sever the link
with Rome they permitted; anything beyond that, any dangerous break towards the
primitive teachings of Jesus or the crude direct interpretation of the Bible,
they resisted. The Established Church of England is one of the most typical and
successful of the resulting compromises. It is still sacramental and sacerdotal;
but its organization centres in the Court and the Lord Chancellor, and though
subversive views may, and do, break out in the lower and less prosperous ranks
of its priesthood, it is impossible for them to struggle up to any position of
influence and authority.

The Reformation according to the common man was very different in spirit from
the Princely Reformation. We have already told something of the popular attempts
at Reformation in Bohemia, and Germany. The wide spiritual upheavals of the time
were at once more honest, more confused, more enduring, and less immediately
successful than the reforms of the princes. Very few religious-spirited men had
the daring to break away or the effrontery to confess that they had broken away
from all authoritative teaching, and that they were now relying entirely upon
their own minds and consciences. That required a very high intellectual courage.
The general drift of the common man in this period in Europe was to set up his
new acquisition, the Bible, as a counter authority to the church. This was
particularly the case with the great leader of German Protestanism, Martin
Luther (1483-1546). All over Germany, and indeed all over Western Europe, there
were now men spelling over the black-letter pages of the newly translated and
printed Bible, over the Book of Leviticus and the Song of Solomon and the
Revelation of St. John the Divine strange and perplexing books-quite as much as
over the simple and inspiring record of Jesus in the Gospels. Naturally they
produced strange views and grotesque interpretations. It is surprising that they
were not stranger and grotesquer. But the human reason is an obstinate thing,
and will criticize and select in spite of its own resolutions. The bulk of these
new Bible students took what their consciences approved from the Bible and
ignored its riddles and contradictions. All over Europe, wherver the new
Protestant churches of the princes were, set up, a living and very active
residuum of Protestants remained who declined to have their religion made over
for them in this fashion. These were the Nonconformists, a medley of sects,
having nothing in common but their resistance to authoritative religion, whether
of the Pope or the State.\ [#fn6]_  Most, but not, all of these Nonconformists held to
the Bible as a divinely inspired and authoritative guide. This was a strategic
rather than an abiding position, and the modern drift of Nonconformity has been
onward away from this original Bibliolatry towards a mitigated and
sentimentalized recognition of the bare teachings of Jesus of Nazareth. Beyond
the range of Nonconformity, beyond the range of professed Christianity at all,
there is also now a great and growing mass of equalitarian belief and altruistic
impulse in the modern civilizations, which certainly owes, as we have already
asserted, its spirit to Christianity, which began to appear in Europe as the
church lost its grip upon the general mind.

.. _Figure 722:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0722.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0722.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 722

    Figure 722: Loyola

Let us say a word now of the third phase of the Reformation process, the
Reformation within the church. This was already beginning in the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries with the appearance of the Black and Grey Friars (Chap.
XXXII, sec 13). In the sixteenth century, and when it was most needed, came a
fresh impetus of the same kind. This was the foundation of the Society of the
Jesuits by Inigo Lopez do Recalde, better known to the world of to-day as St.
Ignatius of Loyola.

Ignatius began his career as a very tough and gallant young Spaniard. He was
clever and dexterous and inspired by a passion for pluck, hardihood, and rather
showy glory. His love affairs were free and picturesque. In 1521 the French took
the town of Pampeluna in Spain from the Emperor Charles V, and Ignatius was one
of the defenders. His legs were smashed by a cannon-ball, and he was taken
prisoner. One leg was badly set and had to be broken again, and these painful
and complex operations nearly cost him his life. He received the last
sacraments. In the night, thereafter, he began to mend, and presently he was
convalescent and facing the prospect of a life in which be would perhaps always
be a cripple. His thoughts turned to the adventure of religion. Sometimes he
would think of a certain great lady, and how, in spite of his broken state, he
might yet win her admiration by some amazing deed; and sometimes he would think
of being in some especial and personal way the Knight of Christ. In the midst of
these confusions, one night as be lay awake, he tells us, a new great lady
claimed his attention; he had a vision of the Blessed Virgin Mary carrying the
Infant Christ in her arms. «Immediately a loathing seized him for the former
deeds of his life». He resolved to give up all further thoughts of earthly
women, and to lead a life of absolute chastity and devotion to the Mother of
God. He projected great pilgrimages and a monastic life.

His final method of taking his vows marks him the country-man of Don Quixote.
He had regained his strength, and he was riding out into the world rather
aimlessly, a penniless soldier of fortune with little but his arms and the mule
on which he rode, when he fell into company with a Moor. They went on together
and talked, and presently disputed about religion. The Moor was the better
educated man; he had the best of the argument, he said offensive things about
the Virgin Mary that were difficult to answer, and he parted triumphantly from
Ignatius. The young Knight of our Lady was boiling with shame and indignation.
He hesitated whether he should go after the Moor and kill him or pursue the
pilgrimage he had in mind. At a fork in the road he left things to his mule,
which spared the Moor. He came to the Benedictine Abbey of Manresa near
Montserrat, and here he imitated that peerless hero of the mediaeval romance,
Amadis de Gaul, and kept an all-night vigil before the Altar of the Blessed
Virgin. He presented his mule to the abbey, he gave his worldly clothes to a
beggar, he laid his sword and dagger upon the altar, and clothed himself in a
rough sackcloth garment and hempen shoes. He then took himself to a neighbouring
hospice and gave himself up to scourgings and austerities. For a whole week he
fasted absolutely. Thence he went on a pilgrimage to the Holy Land.

For some years he wandered, consumed with the idea of founding a new order of
religious knighthood, but not knowing clearly how to set about this enterprise.
He became more and more aware of his own illiteracy, and the Inquisition, which
was beginning to take an interest in his proceedings, forbade him to attempt to
teach others until he had spent at least four years in study. So much cruelty
and intolerance is laid at the door of the Inquisition that it is pleasant to
record that in its handling of this heady, imaginative young enthusiast it
showed itself both sympathetic and sane. It recognized his vigour and possible
uses; it saw the dangers of his ignorance. He studied at Salamanca and Paris,
among other places. He was ordained a priest in 1538, and. a year later his
long-dreamt-of order was founded under the military title of the «Company of
Jesus». like the Salvation Army of modern England, it made the most direct
attempt to bring the generous tradition of military organization and discipline
to the service of religion.

This Ignatius of Loyola who founded the order of Jesuits was a man of
forty-seven; he was a very different man, much wiser and steadier, than the
rather absurd young man who had aped Amadis de Gaul and kept vigil in the abbey
of Manresa; and the missionary and educational organization be now created and
placed at the disposal of the Pope was one of the most powerful instruments the
church had ever handled. These men gave themselves freely and wholly to be used
by the church. It was the Order of the Jesuits which carried Christianity to
China again after the downfall of the Ming Dynasty, and Jesuits were the chief
Christian missionaries in India and North America. To their civilizing work
among the Indians in South America we shall presently allude. But their main
achievement lay in raising the standard of Catholic education. Their schools
became and remained for a long time the best schools in Christendom. Says Lord
Verulam. (= Sir Francis Bacon): «As for the pedagogic part... consult the
schools of the Jesuits, for nothing better has been put in practice». They
raised the level of intelligence, they quickened the conscience of all Catholic
Europe, they stimulated Protestant Europe to competitive educational efforts....
Some day it may be we shall see a new order of Jesuits, vowed not to the service
of the Pope, but to the service of mankind.

And concurrently with this great wave of educational effort, the tone and
quality of the church was also greatly improved by the clarification of doctrine
and the reforms in organization and discipline that were made by the Council of
Trent. This council met intermittently either at Trent or Bologna between the
years 1545 and 1563, and its work was at least as important as the energy of the
Jesuits in arresting the crimes and blunders that were causing state after state
to fall away from the Roman communion. The change wrought by the Reformation
within the Church of Rome was as great as the change wrought in the Protestant
churches that detached themselves from the mother body. There are henceforth no
more open scandals or schisms to record. But if anything, there has been an
intensification of doctrinal narrowness, and such phases of imaginative vigour
as are represented by Gregory the Great, or by the group of Popes associated
with Gregory VII and Urban II, or by the group that began with Innocent III, no
longer enliven the sober and pedestrian narrative. The world war of 1914-1918
was a unique opportunity for the Papacy; the occasion was manifest for some
clear strong voice proclaiming the universal obligation to righteousness, the
brotherhood of men, the claims of human welfare over patriotic passion. No such
moral lead was given. The Papacy seemed to be balancing its traditional reliance
upon the faithful Habsburgs against its quarrel with republican France.

.. [#fn6] But Nonconformity was stamped out in Germany. See par. 11B of this chapter.
