
34.6 The Reawakening of Science
========================================================================
The reader must not suppose that the destructive criticism of the Catholic
Church and of Catholic Christianity, and the printing and study of the Bible,
were the only or even the most important of the intellectual activities of the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. That was merely the popular and most
conspicuous aspect of the intellectual revival of the time. Behind this
conspicuous and popular awakening to thought and discussion, other less
immediately striking but ultimately more important mental developments were in
progress. Of the trend of these developments we must now give some brief
indications. They had begun long before books, were printed, but it was printing
that released them from obscurity.

We have already told something of the first appearance of the free
intelligence, the spirit of inquiry and plain statement, in human affairs. One
name is central in the record of that first attempt at systematic knowledge, the
name of Aristotle. We have noted also the brief phase of scientific work at
Alexandria. From that time onward the complicated economic and political and
religious conflicts of Europe and Western Asia impeded further intellectual
progress. These regions, as we have seen, fell for long ages under the sway of
the Oriental type of monarchy and of Oriental religious traditions. Rome tried
and abandoned a slave system of industry. The first great capitalistic system
developed and fell into chaos through its own inherent rottenness. Europe
relapsed into universal insecurity. The Semite rose against the Aryan, and
replaced Hellenic civilization throughout Western Asia, and Egypt by an Arabic
culture. All Western Asia and half of Europe fell under Mongolian rule. It is
only in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries that we find the Nordic
intelligence struggling through again to expression.

We then find in the growing universities of Paris, Oxford, and Bologna an
increasing amount of philosophical discussion going on. In form it is chiefly a
discussion of logical questions. As the basis of this discussion we find part of
the teachings of Aristotle, not the whole mass of writings he left behind him,
but big logic only. Later on his work became better known through the Latin
translations of the Arabic edition annotated by Averroes. Except for these
translations of Aristotle, and they were abominably bad translations, very
little of the Greek philosophical literature was read in Western Europe until
the fifteenth century. The creative Plato-as distinguished from the scientific
Aristotle-was almost unknown. Europe had the Greek criticism without the Greek
impulse. Some neo-Platonic writers were known, but neo-Platonism had much the
same relation to Plato that Christian Science has to Christ.

It has been the practice of recent writers to decry the philosophical
discussion of the mediaeval «schoolmen» as tedious and futile. It was nothing of
the sort. It had to retain a severely technical form because the dignitaries of
the church, ignorant and intolerant, were on the watch for heresy. It lacked the
sweet clearness, therefore, of fearless thought. It often hinted what it dared
not say. But it dealt with fundamentally important things, it was a long and
necessary struggle to clear up and correct certain inherent defects of the human
mind, and many people to-day blunder dangerously through their neglect of the
issues the schoolmen discussed.

There is a natural tendency in the human mind to exaggerate the differences
and resemblances upon which classification is based, to suppose that things
called by different names, are altogether different, and that things called by
the same name are practically identical. This tendency to exaggerate
classification produces a thousand evils and injustices. In the sphere of race
or nationality, for example, A «European» will often treat an «Asiatic» almost
as if he were a different animal, while he will be disposed to regard another
«European» as necessarily as virtuous and charming as himself. He will, as a
matter of course, take sides with Europeans against Asiatics, But, as the reader
of this history must realize, there is no such difference as the opposition of
these names implies. It is a phantom difference created by two names. . . .

The main mediaeval controversy was between the «Realists» and the
«Nominalists», and it is necessary to warn the reader that the word «Realist» in
mediaeval discussion has a meaning almost diametrically opposed to «Realist» as
it is used in the jargon of modern criticism. The modern «Realist» is one who
insists on materialist details; the mediaeval «Realist» was far nearer what
nowadays we should call an Idealist, and his contempt for incidental detail was
profound. The Realists outdid the vulgar tendency to exaggerate the significance
of class. They held that there was something in a name, in a common noun that
is, that was essentially real. For example, they held there was a typical
«European», an ideal European, who was far more real than any individual
European. Every European was, as it were a failure, a departure, a flawed
specimen of this profounder reality.. On the other hand the Nominalist held that
the only realities in the case were the individual Europeans, that the name
«European» was merely a name and nothing more than a name applied to all these
instances.

Nothing is quite so difficult as the compression of philosophical
controversies, which are by their nature voluminous and various and tinted by
the mental colours of a variety of minds. With the difference of Realist and
Nominalist stated baldly, as we have stated it here, the modern reader
unaccustomed to philosophical discussion may be disposed to leap at once to the
side of the Nominalist. But the matter is not so simple that it can be covered
by one instance, and here we have purposely chosen an extreme instance. Names
and classifications differ in their value and reality. While it is absurd to
suppose that there can be much depth of class difference between men called
Thomas and men called William, or that there is an ideal and quintessential
Thomas or William, yet on the other hand there may be much profoundor
differences between a white man and a Hottentot, and still more between Homo
sapiens and Homo *neanderthalensis. While* again the distinction between
the class of pets and the class of useful animals is dependent upon very slight
differences of habit and application, the difference of a cat and dog is so
profound that the microscope can trace it in a drop of blood or a single hair.
When this aspect of the question is considered, it becomes understandable how
Nominalism had ultimately to abandon the idea that, names were as insignificant
as labels, and how out of a revised and amended Nominalism, there grew up that
systematic attempt to find the true-the most significant and
fruitful-classification of things and substances which is called Scientific
Research.

And it will be almost as evident that while the-tendency of Realism, which is
the natural tendency of every untutored mind, was towards dogma, harsh
divisions, harsh judgments, and uncompromising attitudes, the tendency of
earlier and later Nominalism was towards qualified statements, towards an
examination of individual instances, and towards inquiry and experiment and
scepticism.

So while in the market-place and the ways of the common life men were
questioning the morals and righteousness of the clergy, the good faith and
propriety of their celibacy, and the justice of papal taxation; while in
theological circles their minds were set upon the question of
transubstantiation, the question of the divinity or not of the bread and wine in
the mass, in studies and lecture-rooms a wider-reaching criticism of the methods
of ordinary Catholic teaching was in progress. We cannot attempt here to gauge
the significance in this process of such names as Peter Abelard (1079-1142),
Albertus Magnus (1193-1280), and Thomas Aquinas (1225-1274). These men sought to
reconstruct Catholicism on a sounder system of reasoning. They turned towards
Nominalism. Chief among their critics and successors were Duns Scotus (?-1308),
an Oxford Franciscan and to judge by his sedulous thought and deliberate
subtleties, a Scotchman, and Occam, an Englishman (?-1347). Both these latter,
like Averroes, (see Chap. XXXI, sec 8), made a definite distinction. between
theological and philosophical truth; they placed theology on a pinnacle, but
they placed it where it could no longer obstruct research; Duns Scotus declared
that it was impossible to prove by reasoning the existence of God or of the
Trinity or the credibility of the Act of Creation; Occam was still more
insistent upon this separation which manifestly released scientific inquiry from
dogmatic control. A later generation, benefiting by the freedoms towards which
these pioneers worked, and knowing not the sources of its freedom, had the
ingratitude to use the name of Scotus as a term for stupidity, and so we have
our English word «Dunce». Says Professor Pringle Pattison,\ [#fn7]_  «Occam, who is
still a Scholastic, gives us the Scholastic justification of the spirit which
had already taken hold upon Roger Bacon, and which was to enter upon its rights
in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries».

Standing apart by himself because of his distinctive genius is this Roger
Bacon (about 1210 to about 1293), who was also English. He was a Franciscan of
Oxford, and a very typical Englishman indeed, irritable, hasty, honest, and
shrewd. He was two centuries ahead of his world. Says H. 0. Taylor of him,\ [#fn8]_ 
:

«The career of Bacon was an intellectual tragedy, conforming to the old
principles of tragic art: that the hero's character shall be large and noble,
but not flawless, inasmuch as the fatal consummation must issue from character,
and not happen through chance. He died an old man, as in his youth, so in his
age, a devotee of tangible knowledge. His pursuit of a knowledge which was not
altogether learning had been obstructed by the Order of which he was an unhappy
and rebellious member; quite as fatally his achievement was deformed from within
by the principles which he accepted from his time. But he was responsible for
his acceptance of current opinions; and as his views roused the distrust of his
brother Friars, his intractable temper drew their hostility on his head.
Persuasiveness and tact were needed by one who would impress such novel views as
his upon his fellows, or in the thirteenth century, escape persecution for their
divulgence. Bacon attacked dead and living worthies, tactlessly, fatuously, and
unfairly. Of his life scarcely anything is known, save from his allusions to
himself and others; and these are insufficient for the construction of even a
slight consecutive narrative. Born; studied at Oxford; went to Paris, studied,
experimented; is at Oxford again, and a Franciscan; studies, teaches, becomes
suspect to his Order, is sent back to Paris, kept under surveillance, receives a
letter from the Pope, writes, writes, writes-his three bestknown works; is again
in trouble, confined for many years, released, and dead, so very dead, body and
fame alike, until partly unearthed after five centuries»..

The bulk of these «three best-known works» is a hotly phrased and sometimes
quite abusive, but entirely just attack on the ignorance of the times, combined
with a wealth of suggestions for the increase of knowledge. In his passionate
insistence upon the need of experiment and of collecting knowledge, the spirit
of Aristotle lives again in him. «Experiment, experiment», that is the burthen
of Roger Bacon. Yet of Aristotle himself Roger Bacon fell foul. He fell foul of
him because men, instead of facing facts boldly, sat in rooms and pored over,
the bad Latin translations which were then all that was available of the master.
«If I had my way», he wrote in his intemperate fashion, «I should burn all the
books of Aristotle, for the study of them can only lead to a loss of time,
produce error, and increase ignorance», a sentiment that Aristotle would
probably have echoed could he have returned to a world in which his works were
not so much read as worshipped-and that, as Roger Bacon showed, in these most
abominable translations.

Throughout his books, alittle disguised by the necessity of seeming to square
it all with orthodoxy for fear of the prison and worse, Roger Bacon shouted to
mankind, «Cease to be ruled by dogmas and authorities; look *at the
world!»* Four chief sources of ignorance he denounced; respect for authority,
custom, the sense of the ignorant crowd, and the vain proud unteachableness of
our dispositions. Overcome but these, and a world of power would open to
men:—

«Machines for navigating are possible without rowers, so that great ships
suited to river or ocean, guided by one man, may be borne with greater speed
than if they were full of men. Likewise cars may be made so that without a
draught animal they may be moved cum *impetu inaestimabili,* as we deem the
scythed chariots to have been from which antiquity fought. And flying machines
are possible, so that a man may sit in the middle turning some device by which
artificial wings may beat the air in the manner of a flying bird».

Occam, Roger Bacon, these are the early precursors of a great movement in
Europe away from «Realism» towards reality. For a time the older influences
fought against the naturalism of the new Nominalists. In 1339 Occam's books were
put under a ban and Nominalism solemnly condemned. As late as 1473 an attempt,
belated and unsuccessful, was made to bind teachers of Paris by an oath to teach
Realism. It was only in the sixteenth century with the printing of books and the
increase of intelligence that the movement from absolutism towards experiment
became massive, and that one investigator began to cooperate with another.

Throughout the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries experimenting with
material things was on the increase, items of knowledge were being won by men,
but there was no interrelated advance. The work was done in a detached, furtive,
and inglorious manner. A tradition of isolated investigation came into Europe
from the Arabs, and a considerable amount of private and secretive research was
carried on by the alchemists, for whom modern writers are a little too apt with
their contempt. These alchemists were in close touch with the glass and metal
workers and with the herbalists and medicine-makers of the times; they pried
into many secrets of nature, but they were obsessed by «practical» ideas; they
sought not knowledge, but power; they wanted to find out how to manufacture gold
from cheaper materials, how to make men immortal by the elixir of life, and
such-like vulgar dreams. Incidentally in their researches they learnt much about
poisons, dyes, metallurgy, and the like; they discovered various refractory
substances, and worked their way towards clear glass and so to lenses and
optical instruments; but as scientific men tell us continually, and as
«practical» men still refuse to learn, it is only when knowledge is sought for
her own sake that she gives rich and unexpected gifts in any abundance to her
servants. The world of to-day is still much more disposed to spend money on
technical research than on pure science. Half the men in our scientific
laboratories still dream of patents and secret processes. We live to-day largely
in the age of alchemists, for all our sneers at their memory. The «business man»
of to-day still thinks of research as a sort of alchemy.

Closely associated with the alchemists were the astrologers, who were also a
«practical» race. They studied the stars to tell fortunes. They lacked that
broader faith and understanding which induces men simply to study the stars.

Not until the fifteenth century did the ideas which Roger Bacon first
expressed begin to produce their first-fruits in now knowledge and a widening
outlook. Then suddenly, as the sixteenth century dawned, and as the world
recovered from the storm of social trouble that had followed the pestilences of
the fourteenth century, Western Europe broke out into a galaxy of names that
outshine the utmost scientific reputations of the best age of Greece. Nearly
every nation contributed, the reader will note, for science knows no
nationality.

One of the earliest and most splendid in this constellation is the
Florentine, Leonardo, da Vinci (1452-1519), a man with an almost miraculous
vision for reality. He was a naturalist, an anatomist, an engineer, as well as a
very great artist. He was the first modern to realize the true nature of
fossils,\ [#fn9]_  he made note-books of observations that still amaze us, he was
convinced of the practicability of mechanical flight. Another great name is that
of Copernicus, a Pole (1473-1543), who made the first clear analysis of the
movements of the heavenly bodies and showed that the earth moves round the sun.
Tycho Brahe (1546-1601), a Dane working at the university of Prague, rejected
this latter belief, but his observations of celestial movements were of the
utmost value to his successors, and especially to the German, Kepler
(1571-1630). Galileo Galilei (1564-1642) was the founder of the science of
dynamics. Before his time it was believed that a weight a hundred times greater
than another would fall a hundred times as fast. Galileo denied this. Instead of
arguing about it like a scholar and a gentleman, he put it to the coarse test of
experiment by dropping two unequal weights from an upper gallery of the leaning
tower of Pisa-to the horror of all erudite men. He made what was almost the
first telescope, and he developed the astronomical views of Copernicus; but the
church, still struggling gallantly against the light, decided that to believe
that the earth was smaller and inferior to the sun made man and Christianity of
no account, and diminished the importance of the Pope; so Galileo, under threats
of dire punishment, when he was an old man of sixty-nine, was made to recant
this view and put the earth back in its place as the immovable centre of the
universe. He knelt before ten cardinals in scarlet, an assembly august enough to
overawe truth itself, while he amended the creation he had disarranged. The
story has it that as he rose from his knees, after repeating his recantation, he
muttered, «Eppur si Muove»-»it moves nevertheless».

Newton (1642-1727) was born in the year of Galileo's death. By his discovery
of the law of gravitation he completed the clear vision of the starry universe
that we have to-day. But Newton carries us into the eighteenth century. He
carries us too far for the present chapter. Among the earlier names, that of Dr.
Gilbert (1540-1603), of Colchester, is pre-eminent. Roger Bacon had preached
experiment, Gilbert was one of the first to practise it. There can be little
doubt that his work, which was - chiefly upon magnetism, helped to form the
ideas of Francis Bacon, Lord Verulam (1561-1626), Lord Chancellor to James I of
England. This Francis Bacon has been called the «Father of Experimental
Philosophy», but of his share in the development of scientific work far too much
has been made.\ [#fn10]_  He was, says Sir R. A. Gregory, «not the founder but the
apostle» of the scientific method. His greatest service to science was a
fantastic book, *The New Atlantis.* «In his New *Atlantis,* Francis
Bacon planned in somewhat fanciful language a palace of invention, a great
temple of science, where the pursuit of knowledge in all its branches was to be
organized on principles of the highest efficiency».

From this Utopian dream arose the Royal Society of London, which received a
Royal Charter from Charles II of England in 1662. The essential use and virtue
of this society was and is *publication.* Its formation marks a definite
step from isolated inquiry towards cooperative work, from the secret and
solitary investigations of the alchemist to the frank report and open discussion
which is the life of the modern scientific process. For the true scientific
method is this: to trust no statements without verification, to test all things
as rigorously as possible, to keep no secrets, to attempt no monopolies, to give
out one's best modestly and plainly, serving no other end but knowledge.

The long-slumbering science of anatomy was revived by Harvey (1578-1657), who
demonstrated the circulation of the blood. . . . Presently the Dutchman,
Leeuwenhoek (1632-1723) brought the first crude microscope to bear upon the
hidden minutiae of life.

These are but some of the brightest stars amidst that increasing Multitude of
men who have from the fifteenth century to our own time, with more and more
collective energy and vigour, lit up our vision of the universe, and increased
our power over the conditions of our lives.

.. [#fn7]  Encyclopaedia Britannica, article "Scholasticism."
.. [#fn8]  :t:`The Medieval Mind`, by Henry Osborne Taylor.
.. [#fn9]  Cp. Chap II, par. 1, towards the end.
.. [#fn10]  See Gregory’s :t:`Discovery`, chap. vi.
