
34.7 The New Growth of European Towns
========================================================================
.. _Figure 738:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0738.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0738.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 738

    Figure 738: European Trade Routes of the 14th Century

We have dealt thus fully with the recrudescence of scientific studies in the
Middle Ages because of its ultimate importance in human affairs. In the long
run, Roger Bacon is of more significance to mankind than any monarch of his
time. But the contemporary world, for the most part, knew nothing of this
smouldering activity in studies and lecture-rooms and alchemist's laboratories
that was presently to alter all the conditions of life. The church did indeed
take notice of what was afoot, but only because of the disregard of her
conclusive decisions. She had decided that the earth was the very centre of
God's creation, and that the Pope was the divinely appointed ruler of the earth.
Men's ideas on these essential points, she insisted, must not be disturbed by
any contrary teaching. So soon, however, as she had compelled Galileo to say
that the world did not move she was satisfied; she does not seem to have
realized how ominous it was for her that, after all, the earth did move.

Very great social as well as intellectual developments were in progress in
Western Europe throughout this period of the later Middle Ages. But the human
mind apprehends events far more vividly than changes; and men for the most part,
then as now, kept on in their own traditions in spite of the shifting scene
about them.

In an outline such as this it is impossible to crowd in the clustering events
of history that do not clearly show the main process of human development,
however bright and picturesque they may be. We have to record the steady growth
of towns and cities, the reviving power of trade and money, the gradual
re-establishment of law and custom, the extension of security, the supersession
of private warfare that went on in Western Europe in the period between the
first crusade and the sixteenth century. Of much that looms large in our
national histories we cannot tell anything. We have no space for the story of
the repeated attempts of the English kings to conquer Scotland and set
themselves up as kings of France, nor of how the Norman English established
themselves insecurely in Ireland (twelfth century), and how Wales was linked to
the English crown (1282). All through the Middle Ages, the struggle of England
with Scotland and France was in progress; there were times when it seemed that
Scotland was finally subjugated and when the English king held far more land in
France than its titular sovereign. In the English histories this struggle with
France is too often represented as a single-handed and almost successful attempt
to conquer France. In reality it was a joint enterprise undertaken in concert
first, with the Flemings and Bavarians and afterwards with the powerful French
vassal state of Burgundy to conquer and divide the patrimony of Hugh Capet. Of
the English rout by the Scotch at Bannockburn (1314), and of William Wallace,
and Robert the Bruce, the Scottish national heroes, of the battles of Crecy
(1346) and Poitiers (1356) and Agincourt (1415) in France, which shine like
stars in the English imagination, little battles in which sturdy bowmen through
some sunny hours made a great havoc among French knights in armour, of the Black
Prince and Henry V of England, and of how a peasant girl, Joan of Arc, the Maid
of Orleans, drove the English out of her country again (1429-1430), this history
relates nothing. For every country has such cherished national events. They are
the ornamental tapestry of history, and no part of the building. Rajputana or
Poland, Russia, Spain, Persia, and China can all match or outdo the utmost
romance of western Europe, with equally adventurous knights and equally valiant
princesses and equally stout fights against the odds. Nor can we tell how Louis
XI of France (1461- 1483), the son of Joan of Arc's Charles VII, brought
Burgundy to heel and laid the foundations of a centralized French monarchy. It
signifies more that in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, gunpowder, that
Mongol gift, came to Europe so that the kings (Louis XI included) and the law,
relying upon the support of the growing towns, were able to batter down the
castles of the half-independent robber knights and barons of the earlier Middle
Ages and consolidate a more centralized power. The fighting nobles and knights
of the barbaric period disappear slowly from history during these centuries; the
Crusades consumed them, such dynastic wars as the English Wars of the Roses
killed them off, the arrows from the English long-bow pierced them and stuck out
a yard behind, infantry so armed swept them from the stricken field; they became
reconciled to trade and changed their nature. They disappeared in everything but
a titular sense from the west and south of Europe before they disappeared from
Germany. The knight in Germany remained a professional fighting man into the
sixteenth century.

Between the eleventh and the fifteenth centuries in western Europe, and
particularly in France and England, there sprang up like flowers a multitude of
very distinctive and beautiful buildings, cathedrals, abbeys, and the like, the
Gothic architecture. This lovely efflorescence marks the appearance of a body of
craftsmen closely linked in its beginnings to the church. In Italy and Spain,
too, the world was beginning to build freely and beautifully again. At first it
was the wealth of the church that provided most of these buildings; then kings
and merchants also began to build.

From the twelfth century onward, with the increase of trade, there was a
great revival of town life throughout, Europe. Prominent among these towns were
Venice, with its dependents Ragusa and Corfu, Genoa, Verona, Bologna, Pisa,
Florence, Naples, Milan, Marseilles, Lisbon, Barcelona, Narbonne, Tours,
Orleans, Bordeaux, Paris, Ghent, Bruges, Boulogne, London, Oxford, Cambridge,
Southampton, Dover, Antwerp, Hamburg, Bremen, Cologne, Mayence, Nuremberg,
Munich, Leipzig, Magdeburg, Breslau, Stettin, Dantzig, Koenigsberg, Riga, Pskof,
Novgorod, Wisby, and Bergen.

«A West German town, between 1400 and 1500,\ [#fn11]_  embodied all the
achievements of progress at that time, although from a modern standpoint much
seems wanting. . . . The streets were mostly narrow and irregularly built, the
houses chiefly of wood, while almost every burgher kept his cattle in. the
house, and the herd of swine which was driven every morning by the town herdsman
to the pasture-ground formed an inevitable part of City life.\ [#fn12]_  In
Frankfort-on-Main it was unlawful after 1481 to keep swine in the Altstadt, but
in the Neustadt and in Sachsenhausen this custom remained as a matter of course.
It was only in 1645, after a corresponding attempt in 1556 had failed, that the
swine-pens in the inner town were pulled down at Leipzig. The rich burghers, who
occasionally took part in the great trading companies, were conspicuously
wealthy landowners, and had extensive courtyards with large barns inside the
town walls. The most opulent of them owned those splendid patrician houses which
we still admire even to-day. But even in the older towns most houses of the
fifteenth century have disappeared; only here and there a building with open
timberwork and overhanging storeys, as in Bacharach or Miltenburg, reminds us of
the style of architecture then customary in the houses of burghers. The great
bulk of the inferior population, who lived on mendicancy, or got a livelihood by
the exercise of the inferior industries, inhabited squalid hovels outside the
town; the town wall was often the only support for these wretched buildings. The
internal fittings of the houses, even amongst the wealthy population, were very
defective according to modern ideas; the Gothic style was as little suitable for
the petty details of objects of luxury as it was splendidly adapted for the
building of churches and town halls. The influence of the Renaissance added much
to the comfort of the house.

«The fourteenth and fifteenth century saw the building of numerous Gothic
town churches and town halls throughout Europe which still in many cases serve
their original purpose. The power and prosperity of the towns find their best
expression in these and in the fortifications, with their strong towers and
gateways. Every picture of a town of the sixteenth or later centuries shows
conspicuously these latter erections for the protection and honour of the town.
The town did many things which in our time are done by the State. Social
problems were taken up by town administration or the corresponding municipal
organization. The regulation of trade was the concern of the guilds in agreement
with the council, the care of the poor belonged to the church, while the council
looked after the protection of the town walls and the very necessary fire
brigades. The council, mindful of its social duties, superintended the filling
of the municipal granaries, in order to have supplies in years of scarcity. Such
store-houses were erected in almost every town during the fifteenth century.
Tariffs of prices for the sale of all wares, high enough to enable every artisan
to make a good livelihood, and to give the purchaser a guarantee for the quality
of the wares, were maintained. The town was also the chief capitalist; as a
seller of annuities on lives and inheritances it was a banker and enjoyed
unlimited credit. In return it obtained means for the construction of
fortifications or for such occasions as the acquisition of sovereign rights from
the hand of an impecunious prince».

For the most part these European towns were independent or quasi-independent
aristocratic republics. Most admitted a vague overlordship on the part of the
church, or of the emperor or of a king. Others were parts of kingdoms, or even
the capitals of dukes or kings. In such cases their internal freedom was
maintained by a royal or imperial charter. In England the Royal City of
Westminster on the Thames stood cheek by jowl with the walled city of London,
into which the King came only with ceremony and permission. The entirely free
Venetian republic ruled an empire of dependent islands and trading ports, rather
after the fashion of the Athenian republic. Genoa also stood alone. The Germanic
towns of the Baltic and North Sea from Riga to Middelburg in Holland, Dortmund,
and Cologne were loosely allied in a confederation, the confederation of the
Hansa towns, under the leadership of Hamburg, Bremen, and Lubeck, a
confederation which was still more loosely attached to the empire. This
confederation, which included over seventy towns in all, and which had depots in
Novgorod, Bergen, London, and Bruges, did much to keep the northern seas clean
of piracy, that curse of the Mediterranean and of the Eastern seas. The Eastern
Empire throughout its last phase, from the Ottoman conquest of its European
hinterland in the fourteenth and early fifteenth century until its fall in 1453,
was practically only the trading town of Constantinople, a town state like Genoa
or Venice, except that it was encumbered by a corrupt imperial court.

The fullest and most splendid developments of this city life of the later
Middle Ages occurred in Italy. After the end of the Hohenstaufen line in the
thirteenth century, the hold of the Holy Roman Empire upon North and Central
Italy weakened, although, as we shall tell, German Emperors were still crowned
as kings and emperors in Italy up to the time of Charles V (circa 1530). There
arose a number of quasi-independent city states to the north of Rome, the papal
capital. South Italy and Sicily, however, remained under foreign dominion. Genoa
and her rival, Venice, were the great trading seaports of this time; their noble
palaces, their lordly paintings, still win our admiration. Milan, at the foot of
the St. Gothard pass, revived to wealth and power. Inland was Florence, a
trading and financial centre which, under the almost monarchical rule of the
Medici family in the fifteenth century, enjoyed a second «Periclean ago». But
already before the time of these cultivated Medici «bosses», Florence had
produced much beautiful art. Giotto's tower (Giotto, born 1266, died 1337) and
the Duomo (by Brunellesco, born 1377, died 1446) already existed. Towards the
end of the fourteenth century Florence became the centre of the rediscovery,
restoration, and imitation of antique art (the «Renaissance» in its narrower
sense). Artistic productions, unlike philosophical thought and scientific
discovery, are the ornaments and expression rather than the creative substance
of history, and here we cannot attempt to trace the development of the art of
Filippo Lippi, Botticelli, Donatello (died 1466), Leonardo da Vinci (died 1519),
Michelangelo (1475-1564), and Raphael (died 1520). Of the scientific speculation
of Leonardo we have already had occasion to speak.

.. [#fn11]  From Dr. Tille in Helmolt’s :t:`History of the World`.
.. [#fn12]  Charles Dickens in his American Notes mentions swine in Broadway, New York, in the middle nineteenth century.
