
34.8 America Comes into History
========================================================================

.. _Figure 745:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0745.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0745.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 745

    Figure 745: Map — Voyages of Exploration as of 1522

    Map of the world to show the chief voyages of exploration, to 1522. Columbus's (outward) voyages — 1492, 1493, 1498, 1502 — are numbered 1 to 4. Horizontal lines depict coasts visited by European navigators up to 1522 (the year of the return of Magellan's expedition).

In 1453, as we have related, Constantinople fell. Throughout the next century
the Turkish pressure upon Europe was heavy and continuous. The boundary line
between Mongol and Aryan, which had lain somewhere east of the Pamirs in the
days of Pericles, had receded now to Hungary. Constantinople had long been a
mere island of Christians in a Turk ruled Balkan peninsula. Its fall did much to
interrupt the trade with the East.

Of the two rival cities of the Mediterranean, Venice was generally on much
better terms with the Turks than Genoa. Every intelligent Genoese sailor fretted
at the trading monopoly of Venice, and tried to invent some way of getting
through it or round it. And there were now new peoples taking to the sea trade,
and disposed to look for new ways to the old markets because the ancient routes
were closed to them. The Portuguese, for example, were developing an Atlantic
coasting trade. The Atlantic was waking up again after a vast period of neglect
that dated from the Roman murder of Carthage. It is rather a delicate matter to
decide whether the western European was pushing out into the Atlantic or whether
he was being pushed out into it by the Turk, who lorded it in the Mediterranean
until the Battle of Lepanto (1571). The Venetian and Genoese ships were creeping
round to Antwerp, and the Hansa town seamen were coming south and extending
their range. And there were considerable developments of seamanship and
shipbuilding in progress. The Mediterranean is a sea for galleys and coasting.
But upon the Atlantic Ocean and the North Sea winds are more prevalent, seas run
higher, the shore is often a danger rather than a refuge. The high seas called
for the sailing ship, and in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries it appears
keeping its course by the compass and the stars.

By the thirteenth century the Hansa merchants were already sailing regularly
from Bergen accross the grey cold seas to the Northmen in Iceland. In Iceland
men knew Of Greenland, and adventurous voyagers had long ago found a further
land beyond, Vinland, where the climate was pleasant and where men could settle
if they chose to cut themselves off from the rest of human kind. This Vinland
was either Nova Scotia or what is more probable, New England.

All over Europe in the fifteenth century merchants and sailors were
speculating about new ways to the East. The Portuguese, unaware that Pharaoh
Necho had solved the problem ages ago, were asking whether it was not possible
to go round to India by the coast of Africa. Their ships followed in the course
that Hanno took to Cape Verde (1445). They put out to sea to the west and found
the Canary Isles, Madeira, and the Azores.\ [#fn13]_  That was a fairly long stride
across the Atlantic. In 1486 a Portuguese, Diaz, reported that he had rounded
the south of Africa. . . .

A certain Genoese, Christopher Columbus, began to think more and more of what
is to us a very obvious and natural enterprise, but which strained the
imagination of the fifteenth century to the utmost, a voyage due west across the
Atlantic. At that time nobody knew of the existence of America as a separate
continent. Columbus knew that the world was a sphere, but he underestimated its
size; the travels of Marco Polo had given him an exaggerated idea of the extent
of Asia, and he supposed therefore that Japan, with its reputation for a great
wealth of gold, lay across the Atlantic, in about the position of Mexico.

He had made various voyages in the Atlantic; he had been to Iceland and
perhaps heard of Vinland, which must have greatly encouraged these ideas of his,
and this project of sailing into the sunset became the ruling purpose of his
life. He was a penniless man, some accounts say he was a bankrupt, and his only
way of securing a ship was to get someone to entrust him with a command. He went
first to King John 11 of Portugal, who listened to. him, made difficulties, and
then arranged for an expedition to start without his knowledge, a purely
Portuguese expedition. This highly diplomatic attempt to steal a march on an
original man failed, as it deserved to fail; the crew became mutinous, the
captain lost heart and returned (1483). Columbus then went to the Court of
Spain.

At first he could get no ship and no powers. Spain was assailing Granada, the
last foothold of the Moslems in western Europe. Most of Spain had been recovered
by the Christians between the eleventh and the thirteenth century; then had come
a pause; and now all Spain, united by the marriage of Ferdinand of Aragon and
Isabella of Castile, was setting itself to the completion of the Christian
conquest Despairing of Spanish help, Columbus sent his brother Bartholomew to
Henry VII of England, but the adventure did not attract that canny monarch.
Finally in 1492 Granada fell, and then, helped by some merchants of the town of
Palos, Columbus got his ships, three ships, of which only one, the Santa Maria,
of 100 tons burthen was decked. The two other were open boats of half that
tonnage.

The little expedition—it numbered altogether eighty-eight men!—went south to
the Canaries, and then stood out across the unknown seas, in beautiful weather
and with a helpful wind.

The story of that momentous voyage of two months and nine days must be read
in detail to be appreciated. The Crew was full of doubts and fears; they might,
they feared, sail on forever. They were comforted by seeing some birds, and
later on by finding a pole worked with tools, and a branch with strange berries.
At ten o'clock, on the night of October 11th, 1492, Columbus saw a light ahead;
the next morning land was sighted, and, while the day was still young, Columbus
landed on the shores of the new world, richly apparelled and bearing the royal
banner of Spain. . . .

Early in 1493 Columbus returned to Europe. He brought gold, cotton, strange
beasts and birds, and two wild-eyed painted Indians to be baptized. He had not
found Japan, it was thought, but India. The islands h had found were called
therefore the West Indies. The same year he sailed again with a great expedition
of seventeen ships and fifteen thousand men, with the express permission of the
Pope to take possession of these new lands for the Spanish crown. . . .

We cannot tell of his experiences as Governor of this Spanish colony, nor how
he was superseded and put in chains. In a little while a swarm of Spanish
adventurers were exploring the new lands. But it is interesting to note that
Columbus died ignorant of the fact that he had discovered a new continent. He
believed to the day of his death that he had sailed round the world to Asia.

The news of his discoveries caused a great excitement throughout western
Europe. It spurred the Portuguese to fresh attempts to reach India by the South
African route. In 1497, Vasco da Gama sailed from Lisbon to Zanzibar, and
thence, with an Arab pilot, he struck across the Indian Ocean to Calicut in
India. In 1515 there were Portuguese ships in Java and the Moluccas. In 1519 a
Portuguese sailor, Magellan, in the employment of the Spanish King, coasted to
the south of South America, passed through the dark and forbidding «Strait of
Magellan», and so came into the Pacific Ocean, which had already been sighted by
Spanish explorers who had crossed the Isthmus of Panama.

Magellan's expedition continued across the Pacific Ocean westward. This was a
far more heroic voyage than that of Columbus; for *eight and ninety days*
Magellan sailed unflinchingly over that vast, empty ocean, sighting nothing but
two little desert islands. The crews were rotten with scurvy; there was little
water and that bad, and putrid biscuit to eat. Rats were hunted eagerly; cowhide
was gnawed and sawdust devoured to stay the pangs of hunger. In this state the
expedition reached the Ladrones. They discovered the Philippines, and here
Magellan was killed in a fight with the natives. Several other captains were
murdered. Five ships had started with Magellan in August *1519* and two
hundred and eighty men; in July 1522 the Vittoria, with a remnant of one and
thirty men aboard, returned up the Atlantic to her anchorage near the Mole of
Seville, in the river Guadalquivir-the first ship that ever circumnavigated this
planet.

The English and French and Dutch and the sailors of the Hansa towns came
rather later into this new adventure of exploration. They had not the same keen
interest in the eastern trade. And when they did come in, their first efforts
were directed to sailing round the north of America as Magellan had sailed round
the south, and to sailing round the north of Asia as Vasco da Gama had sailed
round the south of Africa. Both these enterprises were doomed to failure by the
nature of things. Both in America and the East, Spain and Portugal had half a
century's start of England and France and Holland. And Germany never started.
The King of Spain was Emperor of Germany in those crucial years, and the Pope
had given the monopoly of America to Spain, and not simply to Spain, but to the
kingdom of Castile. This must have restrained both Germany and Holland at first
from American adventures. The Hansa towns were quasi-in dependent; they had no
monarch behind them to support them, and no unity among themselves for so big an
enterprise as oceanic exploration. It was the misfortune of Germany, and perhaps
of the world, that, as we will presently tell, a storm of warfare exhausted her
when all the Western powers were going to this newly opened school of trade and
administration upon the high seas.

Slowly throughout the sixteenth century the immense good fortune of Castile
unfolded itself before the dazzled eyes of Europe. She had found a new world,
abounding in gold and silver and wonderful possibilities of settlement. It was
all hers, because the Pope had said so. The Court of Rome, in an access of
magnificence, had divided this new world of strange lands which was now opening
out to the European imagination, between the Spanish, who were to have
everything west of a line 370 leagues west of the Cape Verde islands, and the
Portuguese, to whom everything east of this line was given.

At first the only people encountered by the Spaniards in America were savages
of a Mongoloid type. Many of these savages were cannibals. It is a misfortune
for science that the first Europeans to reach America were these rather
incurious Spaniards, without any scientific passion, thirsty for gold, and full
of the blind bigotry of a recent religious war.

They made few intelligent observations of the native methods and ideas of
these primordial people. They slaughtered them, they robbed them, they enslaved
them, and baptized them; but they made small note of the customs and motives
that changed and vanished under their assault. They were as destructive and
reckless as the British in Tasmania, who shot the last Palæolithic men at sight,
and put out poisoned meat for them to find.

.. _Figure 748:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0748.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0748.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 748

    Figure 748: Mexico and Peru

Great areas of the American interior were prairie land, whose nomadic tribes
subsisted upon vast herds of the now practically extinct bison. In their manner
of life, in their painted garments and their free use of paint, in their general
physical characters, these prairie Indians showed remarkable resemblances to the
Later Palæolithic men of the Solutrian age in Europe. But they had no horses.
They seem to have made no very great advance from that primordial state, which
was probably the state in which their ancestors had reached America. They had,
however, a knowledge of metals, and most notably a free use of native copper but
no knowledge of iron. As the Spaniards penetrated into the continent, they found
and they attacked, plundered, and destroyed two separate civilized systems that
had developed in America, perhaps quite independently of the civilized systems
of the old world. One of them was the Aztec civilization of Mexico; the other,
that of Peru, They had probably arisen out of the heliolithic sub-civilization
that had drifted in canoes across the Pacific, island by island, step by step,
age after age, from its region of origin round and about the Mediterranean. We
have, already noted one or two points of interest in these unique developments.
Along their own lines these civilized peoples of America had reached to a state
of affairs roughly parallel with the culture of predynastic Egypt or the early
Sumerian cities. Before the Aztecs and the Peruvians there had been still
earlier civilized beginnings which had either been destroyed by their
successors, or which had failed and relapsed of their own accord.

The Aztecs seem to have been a conquering, less civilized people, dominating
a more civilized community, as the Aryans dominated Greece and North India.
Their religion was a primitive, complex, and cruel system, in which human
sacrifices and ceremonial cannibalism played a large part. Their minds were
haunted by the idea of sin and the need for, bloody propitiations.

The Aztec civilization was destroyed by an expedition under Cortez. He had
eleven ships, four hundred Europeans, two hundred Indians, sixteen horses, and
fourteen guns. But in Yucatan he picked up a stray Spaniard who had been a
captive with the Indians for some years, and who had more or less learnt various
Indian languages, and knew that the Aztec rule was deeply resented by many of
its subjects. It was in alliance with these that Cortez advanced over the
mountains into the valley of Mexico (1519). How he entered Mexico, how its
monarch, Montezuma, was killed by his own people for favouring the Spaniards,
how Cortez was besieged in Mexico, and escaped with the loss of his guns and
horses, and how after a terrible retreat to the coast he was able to return and
subjugate the whole land, is a romantic and picturesque story which we cannot
even attempt to tell here. The population of Mexico to this day is largely of
native blood, but Spanish has replaced the native languages, and such culture as
exists is Catholic and Spanish.

The still more curious Peruvian state fell, a victim to another adventurer,
Pizarro. He sailed from the Isthmus of Panama in 1530, with an expedition of a
hundred and sixty-eight Spaniards. Like Cortez in Mexico, he availed himself of
the native dissensions to secure possession of the doomed state. Like Cortez,
too, who had made a captive and tool of Montezuma, beseized the Inca of Peru by
treachery, and attempted to rule in his name. Here again we cannot do justice to
the tangle of subsequent events, the ill-planned insurrections of the natives,
the arrival of Spanish reinforcements from Mexico, and the reduction of the
state to a Spanish province. Nor can we tell much more of the swift spread of
Spanish adventurers over the rest of America, outside the Portuguese reservation
of Brazil. To begin with, each story is nearly always a story of adventurers and
of cruelty and loot. The Spaniards ill treated the natives, they quarrelled
among themselves, the law and order of Spain were months and years away from
them; it was only very slowly that the phase of violence and conquest passed
into a phase of government and settlement. But long before there was much order
in America, a steady stream of gold and silver began to flow across the Atlantic
to the Spanish government and people.

After the first violent treasure hunt came plantation and the working of
mines. With that arose the earliest labour difficulty in the now world. At first
the Indians were enslaved with much brutality and injustice; but to the honour
of the Spaniards this did not go uncriticized. The natives found champions, and
very valiant champions, in the Dominican Order and in a secular priest, Las
Casas, who was for a time a planter and slave-owner in Cuba until his conscience
smote him. An importation of negro slaves from West Africa also began quite
early in the sixteenth century. After some retrogression, Mexico, Brazil, and
Spanish South America began to develop into great slave-holding,
wealth-producing lands. . . .

We cannot tell here, as we would like to do, of the fine civilizing work done
in South America, and more especially among the natives, by the Franciscans, and
presently by the Jesuits, who came into America in the latter half of the
sixteenth century (after 1549). . . .

So it was that Spain rose to a temporary power and prominence in the world's
affairs. It was a very sudden and very memorable rise. From the eleventh century
this infertile and corrugated peninsula had been divided against itself, its
Christian population had sustained a perpetual conflict with the Moors; then by
what seems like an accident it achieved unity just in time to reap the first
harvest of benefit from the discovery of America. Before that time Spain had
always been a poor country; it is a poor country to-day, almost its only wealth
lies in its mines. For a century, however, through its monopoly of the gold and
silver of America, it dominated the world. The east and centre of Europe were
still overshadowed by the Turk and Mongol; the discovery of America was itself a
consequence of the Turkish conquests; very largely through the Mongolian
inventions of compass and paper, and under the stimulus of travel in Asia and of
the growing knowledge of eastern Asiatic wealth and civilization, came this
astonishing blazing up of the mental, physical, and social energies of the
«Atlantic fringe». For close in the wake of Portugal and Spain came France and
England, and presently Holland, each in its turn taking up the role of expansion
and empire overseas. The centre of interest for European history which once lay
in the Levant shifts now from the Alps and the Mediterranean Sea to the
Atlantic. For some centuries the Turkish Empire and Central Asia and China are
relatively neglected by the limelight of the European historian. Nevertheless,
these central regions of the world; remain central, and their welfare and
participation is necessary to the permanent peace of mankind.

.. [#fn13]  In these maritime adventures in the eastern Atlantic and the west African coast the Portuguese were preceded in the thirteenth, fourteenth, and early fifteenth centuries by Normans, Catalonians, and Genoese.
