4.1 Life and Water
========================

Wherever the shore line ran there was life, and that life went on in and by
and with water as its home, its medium, and its fundamental necessity.

The first jelly-like beginnings of life must have perished whenever they got
out of the water, as jelly-fish dry up and perish on our beaches today.
Drying up was the fatal thing for life in those days, against which at first
it had no protection. But in a world of rain-pools and shallow seas and
tides, any variation that enabled a living thing to hold out and keep its
moisture during hours of low tide or drought met with every encouragement in
the circumstances of the time. There must have been a constant risk of
stranding. And, on the other hand, life had to keep rather near the shore and
beaches in the shallows because it had need of air (dissolved of course in
the water) and light.

No creature can breathe, no creature can digest its food, without water. We
talk of breathing air, but what all living things really do is to breathe
oxygen dissolved in water. The air we ourselves breathe must first be
dissolved in our lungs; and all our food must be liquefied before it can be
assimilated. Water-living creatures which are always under water, wave the
freely exposed gills by which they breathe in that water, and extract the air
dissolved in it. But a creature that is to be exposed for any time out of the
water must have its body and its breathing apparatus protected from drying
up. Before the seaweeds could creep up out of the Early Paleozoic seas into
the intertidal line of the beach, they had to develop a tougher outer skin to
hold their moisture.

Before the ancestor of the sea scorpion could survive being left by the tide
it had to develop its casing and armour. The trilobites probably developed
their tough covering and rolled up into balls, far less as a protection
against each other and any other enemies they may have possessed, than as a
precaution against drying. And when presently, as we ascend the Paleozoic
rocks, the fish appear, first of all the back-boned or vertebrated animals,
it is evident that a number of them are already adapted by the protection of
their gills with gill covers and by a sort of primitive lung swimming-
bladder, to face the same risk of temporary stranding.

Now the weeds and plants that were adapting themselves to intertidal
conditions were also bringing themselves into a region of brighter light, and
light is very necessary and precious to all plants. Any development of
structure that would stiffen them and hold them up to the light, so that
instead of crumping and flopping when the waters receded, they would stand up
outspread, was a great advantage. And so we find them developing fibre and
support, and the beginning of *woody fibre* in them. The early plants
reproduced by soft spores, or half-animal "gametes", that were released in
water, were distributed by water and could only germinate under water. The
early plants were tied, and most lowly plants today are tied, by the
conditions of their life cycle, to water. But here again there was a great
advantage to be got by the development of some protection of the spores from
drought that would enable reproduction to occur without submergence. So soon
as a species could do that, it could live and reproduce and spread above the,
high-water mark, bathed in light and out of reach of the beating and distress
of the waves. The main classificatory divisions of the larger plants mark
stages in the release of plant life, from the necessity of submergence by the
development of woody support and of a method of reproduction that is more and
more defiant of drying up. The lower plants are still the prisoner attendants
of water. The lower mosses must live in damp, and even the development of the
spore of the ferns demands at certain stages extreme wetness. The highest
plants have carried freedom from water so far that they can live and
reproduce if only there is some moisture in the soil below them. They have
*solved* their problem of living out of water altogether.

The essentials of that problem were worked out through the vast aeons of the
Proterozoic Age and the early Paleozoic Age by nature's method of experiment
and trial. Then slowly, but in great abundance, a variety of new plants began
to swarm away from the sea and over the lower lands, still keeping to swamp
and lagoon and water-course as they spread.
