4.2 The Earliest Animals
=========================

And after the plants came the animal life.

There is no sort of land animal in the world, as there is no sort of land
plant, whose structure is not primarily that of a water-inhabiting being
which has been adapted through the modification and differentiation of
species to life out of the water. This adaptation is attained in various
ways. In the case of the land scorpion the gill-plates of the primitive sea
scorpion are sunken into the body so as to make the lungs secure from rapid
evaporation. The gills of crustaceans, such as the crabs which run about in
the air, are protected by the gill-cover extensions of the back shell or
carapace. The ancestors of the insects developed a system of air pouches and
air tubes, the tracheal tubes, which carry the air all over the body before
it is dissolved. In the case of the vertebrated land animals, the gills of
the ancestral fish were first supplemented and then replaced by a bag-like
growth from the throat, the primitive lung swimming-bladder. To this day
there survive certain mudfish which enable us to understand very clearly the
method by which the vertebrated land animals worked their way out of the
water. These creatures (e.g. the African lung fish) are found in tropical
regions in which there is a rainy full season and a dry season, during which
the rivers become mere ditches of baked mud. During the rainy season these
fish swim about and breathe by gills like any other fish. As the waters of
the river evaporate, these fish bury themselves in the mud, their gills go
out of action, and the creature keeps, itself alive until the waters return
by swallowing air, which passes into its swimming-bladder. The Australian
lung fish, when it is caught by the drying up of the river in stagnant pools,
and the water has become deaerated and foul, rises to the surface and gulps
air. A newt in a pond does exactly the same thing. These creatures still
remain at the transition stage, the stage at which the ancestors of the
higher vertebrated animals were released from their restriction to an under-
water life.


.. figure:: /_static/figures/0022.png
    :figclass: inline-figure left
    :alt: Figure 22
    :width: 280
    :target: ../_static/figures/0022.png

    Figure 22: Australian Lung-fish breathing air

The amphibia (frogs, newts, tritons, etc.) still show in their life history
all the stages in the process of this liberation. They are still dependent on
water for their reproduction; their eggs must be laid in sunlit water, and
there they must develop. The young tadpole has branching external gills that
wave in the water; then a gill cover grows back over them and forms a gill
chamber. Then as the creature's legs appear and its tail is absorbed, it
begins to use its lungs, and its gills dwindle and vanish. The adult frog can
live all the rest of its days in the air, but it can be drowned if it is kept
steadfastly below water. When we come to the reptile, however, we find an egg
which is protected from evaporation by a tough egg case, and this egg
produces young which breathe by lungs from the very moment of hatching. The
reptile is on all fours with the seeding plant in its freedom from the
necessity to pass any stage of its life cycle in water.

The later Paleozoic Rocks of the northern hemisphere give us the materials
for a series of pictures of this slow spreading of life over the land.
Geographically, all round the northern half of the World it was an age of
lagoons and shallow seas very favourable to this invasion. The new plants,
now that they had acquired the power to live this new aerial life, developed
with an extraordinary richness and variety.

There were as yet no true flowering plants (Phanerogams), no grasses, nor
trees that shed their leaves in winter (Deciduous trees); the first "flora"
consisted of great tree ferns, gigantic equisetums, cycad ferns, and kindred
vegetation. Many of these plants took the form of huge-stemmed trees, of
which great multitudes of trunks survive fossilized to this day. Some of
these trees were over a hundred feet high, of orders and classes now vanished
from the world. They stood with their sterns in the water, in which no doubt
there was a thick tangle of soft mosses and green slime and fungoid growths
that left few plain vestiges behind them. The abundant remains of these first
swamp forests constitute the main coal measures of the world today.

.. figure:: /_static/figures/0023.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 23
    :target: ../_static/figures/0023.png

    Figure 23: Some Reptiles of the Later Paleozoic Age

    Six foot man drawn to same scale for comparison

Amidst this luxuriant primitive vegetation crawled and glided and flew the
first insects. They were rigid-winged, four-winged creatures, often very big,
some of them having wings measuring a foot in length. There were numerous
dragon flies â€“ one found in the Belgian coal-measures had a wing span of
twenty-nine inches! There were also a great variety of flying cockroaches.
Scorpions abounded, and a number of early spiders, which, however, had no
spinnerets for web making.\ [#fn01]_ Land snails appeared. So, too, did the first
known step of our own ancestry upon land, the amphibia. As we ascend the
higher levels of the Later Paleozoic record, we find the process of air
adaptation has gone as far as the appearance of true reptiles amidst the
abundant and various amphibia.

The land life of the Upper Paleozoic Age was the life of a green swamp forest
without flowers or birds or the noises of modern insects. There were no big
land beasts at all; wallowing amphibia, and primitive reptiles were the very
highest creatures that life had so far produced. Whatever land lay away from
the water or high above the water was still altogether barren and lifeless.
But steadfastly, generation by generation, life was creeping away from the
shallow sea-water of its beginning.

.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#fn01] This, says Mr. R. I. Pocock, has to be qualified. There were Carboniferous spiders with spinnerets, though they may have used the silk only for egg cases. And he thinks that the Carboniferous myriapods point to    *ground* beneath the trees.

