
22.6 The Quality and Limitations of Greek Thought
========================================================================
If the Greek classics are to be read with any benefit by
modern men, they must be read as the work of men like ourselves. Regard must be
had to their traditions, their opportunities, and their limitations. There is a
disposition to exaggeration in all human admiration; most of our classical
texts are very much mangled, and all were originally the work of human beings
in difficulties, living in a time of such darkness and narrowness of outlook as
makes our own age by comparison a period of dazzling illumination. What we
shall lose in reverence by this familiar treatment, we shall gain in sympathy
for that group of troubled, uncertain, and very modern minds. The Athenian writers
were, indeed, the first of modern men. They were discussing questions that we
still discuss; they began to struggle with the great problems that confront us
today. Their writings are our dawn.\ [#fn7]_ 

They began an inquiry, and they arrived at no solutions. We
cannot pretend today that we have arrived at solutions to most of the questions
they asked. The mind of the Hebrews, as we have already shown, awoke suddenly
to the endless miseries and disorders of life, saw that these miseries and
disorders were largely due to the lawless acts of men, and concluded that
salvation could come only through subduing ourselves to the service of the one
God who rules heaven and earth. The Greek, rising to the same perception, was
not prepared with the same idea of a patriarchal deity; he lived in a world in
which there was not God but the gods; if perhaps he felt that the gods
themselves were limited, then he thought of Fate behind them, cold and
impersonal. So he put his problem in the form of an inquiry as to what was right
living, without any definite correlation of the right-living man with the will
of God. . . . To us, looking at the matter from a standpoint purely historical,
the common problem can now be presented in a form that, for the purposes of
history, covers both the Hebrew and Greek way of putting it. We have seen our
kind rising out of the unconsciousness of animals to a continuing racial
self-consciousness, realizing the unhappiness of its wild diversity of aims,
realizing the inevitable tragedy of individual self-seeking, and feeling its
way blindly towards some linking and subordinating idea to save it from the
pains and accidents of mere individuality. The gods, the god-king, the idea of
the tribe, the idea of the city; here are ideas that have claimed and held for
a time the devotion of men, ideas in which they have a little lost their
individual selfishness and escaped to the realization of a more enduring life.
Yet, as our wars and disasters prove, none of these greater ideas have yet been
great enough. The gods have failed to protect, the tribe has proved itself vile
and cruel, the city ostracized one's best and truest friends, the god-king made
a beast of himself. . . .

As we read over the speculative literature of this great
period of the Greeks, we realize three barriers set about the Greek mind, from
which it rarely escaped, but from which we now perhaps are beginning to escape.

The first of these limitations was the obsession of the
Greek mind by the idea of the city as the ultimate state. In a world in which
empire had followed empire, each greater than its predecessor, in a world
through which men and ideas drove ever more loosely and freely, in a world
visibly unifying even then, the Greeks, because of their peculiar physical and
political circumstances, were still dreaming impossibly of a compact little
city state, impervious to outer influences, valiantly secure against the whole world.
Plato's estimate of the number of citizens in a perfect state varied between
1,000 (the :t:`Republic`) and 5,040 (the
:t:`Laws`) citizens.\ [#fn8]_  This state
was to go to war and hold its own against other
cities of the same size. And this was not a couple of generations after the
hosts of Xerxes had crossed the Hellespont!

Perhaps these Greeks thought the day of world empires had
passed forever, whereas it was only beginning. At the utmost their minds
reached out to alliances and leagues. There must have been men at the court of
Artaxerxes thinking far away beyond these little ideas of the rocky creek, the
island, and the mountain-encircled valley. But the need for unification against
the greater powers that moved outside the Greek-speaking world, the Greek mind disregarded
wilfully. These outsiders were barbarians, not to be needlessly thought about;
they were barred out now from Greece forever. One took Persian money; everybody
took Persian money; what did it matter? Or one enlisted for a time in their
armies (as Xenophon did) and hoped for his luck with a rich prisoner. Athens
took sides in Egyptian affairs, and carried on minor wars with Persia, but
there was no conception of a common policy or a common future for Greece. . . .
Until at last a voice in Athens began to shout «Macedonia!» to clamour like a
watch-dog, «Macedonia I» This was the voice of the orator and demagogue,
Demosthenes, hurling warnings and threats and denunciations at King Philip of
Macedon, who had learnt his politics not only from Plato and Aristotle, but
also from Isocrates and Xenophon, and from Babylon and Susa, and who was
preparing quietly, ably, and steadfastly to dominate all Greece, and through
Greece to conquer the known world. . . .

There was a second thing that cramped the Greek mind, the
institution of domestic slavery. Slavery was implicit in Greek life; men could
conceive of neither comfort nor dignity without it. But slavery shuts off one's
sympathy not only from a class of one's fellow subjects; it puts the
slave-owner into a class and organization against all stranger men. One is of
an elect tribe. Plato, carried by his clear reason and the noble sanity of his
spirit beyond the things of the present, would have abolished slavery; much
popular feeling and the New Comedy were against it; the Stoics and Epicureans,
many of whom were slaves, condemned it as unnatural, but finding it too strong
to upset, decided that it did not affect the soul and might be ignored. With
the wise, there was no bound or free. To the matter-of-fact Aristotle, and
probably to most practical men, its abolition was inconceivable. So they
declared that there were in the world men «naturally slaves». . . .

Finally, the thought of the Greeks was hampered by a want
of knowledge that is almost inconceivable to us today. They had no knowledge of
the past of mankind at all; at best they had a few shrewd guesses. They had no
knowledge of geography beyond the range of the Mediterranean basin and the
frontiers of Persia. We know far more today of what was going on in Susa,
Persepolis, Babylon, and Memphis in the time of Pericles than he did. Their
astronomical ideas were still in the state of rudimentary speculations.
Anaxagoras, greatly daring, thought the sun and moon were vast globes, so vast
that the sun was probably «as big as all the Peloponnesus». Their ideas in
physics and chemistry were the results of profound cogitation; it is wonderful
that they did guess at atomic structure. One has to remember their
extraordinary poverty in the matter of experimental apparatus. They had
coloured glass for ornament, but no white glass; no accurate means of measuring
the minor intervals of time, no really efficient numerical notation, no very
accurate scales, no rudiments of telescope or microscope. A modern scientific
man dumped down in the Athens of Pericles would have found the utmost
difficulty in demonstrating the elements of his knowledge, however crudely, to
the men he would have found there. He would have had to rig up the simplest
apparatus under every disadvantage, while Socrates pointed out the absurdity of
seeking Truth with pieces of wood and string and metal such as small boys use
for fishing. And our professor of science would also have been in constant
danger of a prosecution for impiety.

Our world today draws upon relatively immense accumulations
of knowledge of fact. In the age of Pericles scarcely the first stone of our
comparatively tremendous cairn of things recorded and proved had been put in
place. When we reflect upon this difference, then it ceases to be remarkable
that the Greeks, with all their aptitude for political speculation, were blind
to the insecurities of their civilization from without and from within, to the
necessity for effective unification, to the swift rush of events that was to
end for long ages these first brief freedoms of the human mind.

It is not in the results it achieved, but in the attempts
it made, that the true value for us of this group of Greek talkers and writers
lies. It is not that they answered questions, but that they dared to ask them.
Never before had man challenged his world and the way of life to which he found
his birth had brought him. Never had he said before that he could alter his
conditions. Tradition and a seeming necessity had held him to life as he had
found it grown up about his tribe since time immemorial. Hitherto he had taken
the world as children still take the homes and habits in which they have been
reared.

So in the fifth and fourth centuries B.C. we perceive, most
plainly in Judea and in Athens, but by no means confined to those centres, the
beginnings of a moral and an intellectual process in mankind, an appeal to
righteousness and an appeal to the truth from the passions and confusions and
immediate appearances of existence. It is like the dawn of the sense of
responsibility in a youth, who suddenly discovers that life is neither easy nor
aimless. Mankind is growing up. The rest of history for three and twenty
centuries is threaded with the spreading out and development and interaction
and the clearer and more effective statement of these main leading ideas.
Slowly more and more men apprehend the reality of human brotherhood, the
needlessness of wars and cruelties and oppression, the possibilities of a
common purpose for the whole of our kind. In every generation thereafter there
is the evidence of men seeking for that better order to which they feel our
world must come. But everywhere and wherever in any man the great constructive
ideas have taken hold, the hot greeds, the jealousies, the suspicions and impatience
that are in the nature of every one of us, war against the struggle towards
greater and broader purposes. The last twenty-three centuries of history are
like the efforts of some impulsive, hasty immortal to think clearly and live
rightly. Blunder follows blunder; promising beginnings end in grotesque
disappointments; streams of living water are poisoned by the cup that conveys
them to the thirsty lips of mankind. But the hope of men rises again at last
after every disaster. . . .

We pass on now to the story of one futile commencement, one
glorious shattered beginning of human unity. There was in Alexander the Great
knowledge and imagination, power and opportunity, folly, egotism, detestable
vulgarity, and an immense promise broken by the accident of his early death
while men were still dazzled by its immensity.

.. [#fn7]  Jung in his :t:`Psychology of the Unconscious` is very good in his Chapter
    on the differences between ancient (pre-Athenian) thought and modern thought.
    The former he calls Undirected Thinking, the latter Directed Thinking. The
    former was a thinking in images, akin to dreaming; the latter a thinking in
    words. Science is an organization of directed thinking. The Antique spirit
    (before the Greek thinkers i.e.) created not science but mythology. The ancient
    human world was a world of subjective fantasies like the world of children and
    uneducated young people to-day, and like the world of savages and dreams.
    Infantile thought and dreams are a re-echo of prehistoric and savage methods of
    thinking. Myths, says Jung, are the mass dreams of peoples, and dreams the myths
    of individuals. We have already directed the reader’s attention to the
    resemblance of the early gods of civilization to the fantasies of children. The
    work of hard and disciplined thinking by means of carefully analyzed words and
    statements which was begun by the Greek thinkers and resumed by the scholastic
    philosophers of whom we shall tell in the middle ages, was a necessary
    preliminary to the development of modern science.


.. [#fn8]  "For the proper administration of justice and for the distribution of
    authority it is necessary that the citizens be acquainted with each other’s
    characters, so that, where this cannot be, much mischief ensues, both in the use
    of authority and in the administration of justice; for it is not just to decide
    arbitrarily, as must be the case with excessive population." Aristotle:
    :t:`Politics.`
