15.1 The Earliest Ships and Sailors
========================================
The first boats were made very early indeed in the Neolithic stage of culture
by riverside and lakeside peoples. They were no more than trees and floating
wood, used to assist the imperfect natural swimming powers of men. Then came
the hollowing out of the trees, and then, with the development of tools and a
primitive carpentry, the building of boats. Men in Egypt and Mesopotamia also
developed a primitive type of basketwork boat, caulked with bitumen. Such was
the "ark of bulrushes" in which Moses was hidden by his mother. A kindred
sort of vessel grew up by the use of skins and hides expanded upon a wicker
framework. To this day cow-hide wicker boats (coracles) are used upon the
west coast of Ireland where there is plenty of cattle and a poverty of big
trees. They are also still used on the Euphrates, and on the Towy in South
Wales. Inflated skins may have preceded the coracle, and are still used on
the Euphrates and upper Ganges. In the valleys of the great rivers, boats
must early have become an important means of communication; and it seems
natural to suppose that it was from the mouths of the great rivers that man,
already in a reasonably seaworthy vessel, first ventured out upon what must
have seemed to him then the trackless and homeless sea.

No doubt he ventured at first as a fisherman, having learnt the elements of
seacraft in creeks and lagoons. Men may have navigated boats upon the
Levantine lake before the refilling of the Mediterranean by the Atlantic
waters. The canoe was an integral part of the heliolithic culture; it drifted
with the culture upon the warm waters of the earth from the Mediterranean to
(at last) America. There were not only canoes, but Sumerian boats and ships
upon the Euphrates and Tigris, when these rivers in 7,000 B.C. fell by
separate mouths into the Persian Gulf. The Sumerian city of Eridu, which
stood at the head of the Persian Gulf (from which it is now separated by a
hundred and thirty miles of alluvium \ [#fn1]_), had ships upon the sea then. We
also find evidence of a fully developed sea life six thousand years ago at
the eastern end of the Mediterranean, and possibly at that time there were
already canoes on the seas among the islands of the nearer East Indies. There
are predynastic Neolithic Egyptian representations of Nile ships of a fair
size, capable of carrying elephants.\ [#fn2]_

.. _Figure 157:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0157.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0157.png
    :figclass: full-figure
    :width: 560px
    :alt: Figure 157

    Figure 157: Boats on the Nile, 2500 B.C.

Very soon the seafaring men must have realized the peculiar freedom and
opportunities the ship gave them. They could get away to islands; no chief
nor king could pursue a boat or ship with any certainty; every captain was a
king. The seamen would find it easy to make nests upon islands and in strong
positions on the mainland. There they could harbour, there they could carry
on a certain agriculture and fishery; but their specialty and their main
business was, of course, the expedition across the sea. That was not usually
a trading expedition; it was much more frequently a piratical raid. From what
we know of mankind, we are bound to conclude that the first sailors plundered
when they could, and traded when they had to.

Because it developed in the comparatively warm and tranquil waters of the
eastern Mediterranean, the Red Sea, the Persian Gulf, and the western horn of
the Indian Ocean, the shipping of the ancient world retained throughout
certain characteristics that make it differ very widely from the ocean-going
sailing shipping, with its vast spread of canvas, of the last four hundred
years. "The Mediterranean", says Mr. Torr,\ [#fn3]_

    «is a sea where a vessel
    with sails may lie becalmed for days together, while a vessel with oars would
    easily be traversing the smooth waters, with coasts and islands everywhere at
    hand to give her shelter in case of storm. In that sea, therefore, oars
    became the characteristic instruments of navigation and the arrangement of
    oars the chief problem in shipbuilding. And so long as the Mediterranean
    nations dominated Western Europe, vessels of the southern type were built
    upon the northern coasts, though there generally was wind enough here for
    sails and too much wave for oars.... The art of rowing can first be discerned
    upon the Nile. Boats with oars are represented in the earliest pictorial
    monuments of Egypt, dating from about 2,500 B.C.; and although some crews are
    paddling with their faces towards the bow, others are rowing with their faces
    towards the stern. The paddling is certainly the older practice, for the
    hieroglyph *chen* depicts two arms grasping an oar in the attitude of
    paddling, and the hieroglyphs were invented in the earliest ages. And that
    practice may really have ceased before 2,500 B.C., despite the testimony of
    monuments of that date; for in monuments dating from about 1,250 B.C., crews
    are represented unmistakably rowing with their faces towards the stern and
    yet grasping their oars in the attitude of paddling, so that even then
    Egyptian artists mechanically followed the turn of the hieroglyph to which
    their hands were accustomed. In these reliefs there are twenty rowers on the
    boats on the Nile, and thirty on the ships on the Red Sea; but in the
    earliest reliefs the number varies considerably, and seems dependent on the
    amount of space at the sculptor's disposal.»

The Aryan peoples came late to the sea. The earliest ships on the sea were
either Sumerian or Hamitic; the Semitic peoples followed close upon these
pioneers. Along the eastern end of the Mediterranean, the Phoenicians, a
Semitic people, set up a string of independent harbour towns of which Acre,
Tyre, and Sidon were the chief; and later they pushed their voyages westward
and founded Carthage and Utica in North Africa. Possibly Phoenician keels
were already in the Mediterranean by 2,000 B.C. Both Tyre and Sidon were
originally on islands, and so easily defensible against a land raid. But
before we go on to the marine exploits of this great sea-going race, we must
note a very remarkable and curious nest of early sea people whose remains
have been discovered in Crete.

.. _Figure 158:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0158.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0158.png
    :figclass: full-figure
    :width: 560px
    :alt: Figure 158

    Figure 158: Egyptian Ship on Red Sea, 1250 B.C.

    From Torr's :t:`Ancient Ships`
    
    Mr. Langton Cole calls attention to the rope truss in this illustration,
    stiffening the beam of the ship. No other such use of the truss is known
    until the days of modern engineering.

.. [#fn1] Sayce.

.. [#fn2] Mosso, The Dawn of Mediterranean Civilization. —R. L. C.

.. [#fn3] Cecil Torr, :t:`Ancient Ships`.


