15.3 The First Voyages of Exploration
================================================================
At her zenith Carthage probably had the hitherto unheard-of population of a
million. This population was largely industrial, and her woven goods were
universally famous. As well as a coasting trade, she had a considerable land
trade with Central Africa,\ [#fn4]_ and she sold negro slaves, ivory, metals,
precious stones and the like, to all the Mediterranean people; she worked
Spanish copper mines, and her ships went out into the Atlantic and coasted
along Portugal and France northward as far as the Cassiterides (the Scilly
Isles, or Cornwall, in England) to get tin.

About 520 B.C. a certain Hanno made a voyage that is still one of the most
notable in the world. This Hanno, if we may trust the Periplus of Hanno, the
Greek translation of his account which still survives, followed the African
coast southward from the Straits of Gibraltar as far as the confines of
Liberia. He had sixty big ships, and his main task was to found or reinforce
certain Carthaginian stations upon the Morocco coast. Then he pushed
southward. He founded a settlement in the Rio de Oro (on Kerne or Herne
Island), and sailed on past the Senegal River. The voyagers passed on for
seven days beyond the Gambia, and landed at last upon some island. This they
left in a panic, because, although the day was silent with the silence of the
tropical forests, at night they heard the sound of flutes, drums, and gongs,
and the sky was red with the blaze of the bush fires. The coast country for
the rest of the voyage was one blaze of fire, from the burning of the bush.
Streams of fire ran down the hills into the sea, and at length a blaze arose
so loftily that it touched the skies. Three days further brought them to an
island containing a lake (?Sherbro Island). In this lake was another island
(?Macaulay Island), and on this were wild, hairy men and women, ?whom the
interpreters called gorilla?. The Carthaginians, having caught some of the
females of these ?gorillas? ? they were probably chimpanzees ? turned back
and eventually deposited the skins of their captives ? who had proved
impossibly violent guests to entertain on board ship?in the Temple of Juno.

A still more wonderful Phoenician sea voyage, long doubted, but now supported
by some archaeological evidence, is related by Herodotus, who declares that
the Pharaoh Necho of the XXVIth Dynasty commissioned some Phoenicians to
attempt the circumnavigation of Africa, and that starting from the Gulf of
Suez southward, they did finally come back through the Mediterranean to the
Nile delta. They took nearly three years to complete their voyage. Each year
they landed, and sowed and harvested a crop of wheat before going on.

.. [#fn4] There were no domesticated camels in Africa until after the Persian
    conquest of Egypt. This must have greatly restricted the desert routes. (See
    Bunbury, History of Ancient Geography, note to Chap. VIII.) But the Sahara
    desert of 3,000 or 2,000 years ago was less parched and sterile than it is
    today. From rock engravings we may deduce the theory that the desert was
    crossed from oasis to oasis by riding oxen and by ox-carts; perhaps, also, on
    horses and asses. The camel as a beast of transport was seemingly not
    introduced into North Africa till the Arab invasions of the seventh century
    A.D. The fossil remains of camels are found in Algeria, and wild camels may
    have lingered in the wastes of the Sahara and Somaliland till the
    domesticated camel was introduced. The Nubian wild ass also seems to have
    extended its range to the Sahara â€”H. H. J.
