15.4 Early Traders
================================================================

The great trading cities of the Phoenicians are the most striking of the
early manifestations of the peculiar and characteristic gift of the Semitic
peoples to mankind, trade and exchange.\ [#fn5]_ While the Semitic Phoenician
peoples were spreading themselves upon the seas, another kindred Semitic
people, the Arameans, whose occupation of Damascus we have already noted,
were developing the caravan routes of the Arabian and Persian deserts, and
becoming the chief trading people of Western Asia. The Semitic peoples,
earlier civilized than the Aryan, have always shown, and still show today, a
far greater sense of quality and quantity in marketable goods than the
latter; it is to their need of account-keeping that the development of
alphabetical writing is to be ascribed, and it is to them that most of the
great advances in computation are due. Our modern numerals are Arabic; our
arithmetic and algebra are essentially Semitic sciences.

The Semitic peoples, we may point out here, are to this day *counting
peoples* strong in their sense of equivalents and reparation. The moral
teaching of the Hebrews was saturated by such ideas. "With what measure ye
mote, the same shall be meted unto you". Other races and peoples have
imagined diverse and fitful and marvellous gods, but it was the trading
Semites who first began to think of God as a Righteous Dealer, whose promises
were kept, who failed not the humblest creditor, and called to account every
spurious act.

The trade that was going on in the ancient world before the sixth or seventh
century B.C. was almost entirely, a barter trade. There was little or no
credit or coined money. The ordinary standard of value with the early Aryans
was cattle, as it still is with the Zulus and Kaffirs today. In the Iliad,
the respective values of two shields are stated in head of cattle, and the
Roman word for moneys, *pecunia,* is derived from *pecus*, cattle. Cattle as
money had this advantage: it did not need to be carried from one owner to
another, and if it needed attention and food, at any rate it bred. But it was
inconvenient for ship or caravan transit. Many other substances have at
various times been found convenient as a standard; tobacco was once legal
tender in the colonial days in North America, and in West Africa fines are
paid and bargains made in bottles of trade gin. The early Asiatic trade
included metals; and weighed lumps of metal, since they were in general
demand and were convenient for hoarding and storage, costing nothing for
fodder and needing small houseroom, soon asserted their superiority over
cattle and sheep. Iron, which seems to have been first reduced from its ores
by the Hittites, was, to begin with, a rare and much-desired substance.\ [#fn6]_
It is stated by Aristotle to have supplied the first currency. In the
collection of letters found at Tel-el-Amarna, addressed to and from Amenophis
III (already mentioned) and his successor Amenophis IV, one from a Hittite
king promises iron as an extremely valuable gift. Gold, then as now, was the
most precious, and therefore most portable, security. In early Egypt silver
was almost as rare as gold until after the XVIIIth Dynasty. Later the general
standard of value in the Eastern world became silver, measured by weight.

To begin with, metals were handed about in ingots and weighed at each
transaction. Then they were stamped to indicate their fineness and guarantee
their purity. The first recorded coins were minted about 600 B.C. in Lydia, a
gold producing country in the west of Asia Minor. The first-known gold coins
were minted in Lydia by Croesus, whose name has become a proverb for wealth;
he was conquered, as we shall tell later, by that same Cyrus the Persian who
took Babylon in 539 B.C. But very probably coined money had been used in
Babylonia before that time. The "sealed shekel", a stamped piece of silver,
came very near to being a coin. The promise to pay so much silver or gold on
"leather" (= parchment) with the seal of some established firm is probably as
old or older than coinage. The Carthaginians used such "leather money". We
know very little of the way in which small traffic was conducted. Common
people, who in those ancient times were in dependent positions, seem to have
had no money at all; they did their business by barter. Early Egyptian
paintings show this going on.\ [#fn7]_

.. [#fn5] There was Sumerian trade organized round the temples before the Semites
    got into Babylonia. See Hall and King, Archaeological Discoveries in Western
    Asia. —E. B.

.. [#fn6] Iron bars of fixed weight were used for coin in Britain. Caesar, De Bello Gallico. —G. Wh.

.. [#fn7] The earliest coinage of the west coast of Asia Minor was in electrum, a
    mixture of gold and silver, and there is an interesting controversy as to
    whether the first issues were stamped by cities, temples, or private
    bankers. —P. G.
