15.5 Early Travellers
================================================================

When one realizes the absence of small money or of any conveniently portable
means of exchange in the pre-Alexandrian world, one perceives how impossible
was private travel in those days.\ [#fn8]_ The first "inns" — no doubt a sort
of caravanserai — are commonly said to have come into existence in Lydia in
the third or fourth century B.C. That, however, is too late a date. They are
certainly older than that. There is good evidence of them at least as early
as the sixth century. Aeschylus twice mentions inns. His word is
"all-receiver", or "all-receiving house".\ [#fn9]_ Private travellers must have been
fairly common in the Greek world, including its colonies, by this time. But
such private travel was a comparatively new thing then. The early historians
Hecataeus and Herodotus travelled widely. "I suspect", says Professor Gilbert
Murray, "that this sort of travel 'for Historie' or 'for discovery' was
rather a Greek invention. Solon is supposed to have practised it; and even
Lycurgus".... The earlier travellers were traders travelling in a caravan or
in a shipload, and carrying their goods and their minas and shekels of metal
or gems or bales of fine stuff with them, or government officials travelling
with letters of introduction and a proper retinue. Possibly there were a few
mendicants, and, in some restricted regions, religious pilgrims.

That earlier world before 600 B.C. was one in which a lonely "stranger" was a
rare and suspected and endangered being. He might suffer horrible cruelties,
for there was little law to protect such as he. Few individuals strayed
therefore. One lived and died attached and tied to some patriarchal tribe, if
one was a nomad, or to some great household if one was civilized or to one of
the big temple establishments which we will presently discuss. Or one was a
herded slave. One knew nothing, except for a few monstrous legends, of the
rest of the world in which one lived. We know more today, indeed, of the
world of 600 B.C. than any single living being knew at that time. We map it
out, see it as a whole in relation to past and future. We begin to learn
precisely what was going on at the same time in Egypt and Spain and Media and
India and China. We can share in imagination, not only the wonder of Hanno's
sailors, but of the men who lit the warning beacons on the shore. We know
that those ?mountains flaming to the sky? were only the customary burning of
the dry grass at that season of the year. Year by year, more and more
rapidly, our common knowledge increases. In the years to come men will
understand still more of those lives in the past, until perhaps they will
understand them altogether.

.. [#fn8] Small change was in existence before the time of Alexander. The Athenians
    had a range of exceedingly small silver coins running almost down to the size
    of a pinhead which were generally carried in the mouth; a character in
    Aristophanes was suddenly assaulted, and swallowed his change in
    consequence. —P. G.

.. [#fn9] There is an inn-keeper in Aristophanes, but it may be inferred from the
    circumstance that she is represented as letting lodgings in hell, that the
    early inn left much to be desired. —P. G.
