36.1 Inconveniences of the Great Power System
========================================================================
When Gibbon, nearly a century and a half ago, was congratulating the world of
refined and educated people that the age of great political and social
catastrophes was past, he was neglecting many signs which we—in the wisdom of
accomplished facts—could have told him portended far heavier jolts and
dislocations than any he foresaw. We have told how the struggle of the sixteenth
and seventeenth-century princes for ascendancies and advantages developed into a
more cunning and complicated struggle of foreign offices, masquerading as
idealized «Great Powers», as the eighteenth century wore on. The intricate and
pretentious art of diplomacy developed. The «Prince» ceased to be a single and
secretive Machiavellian schemer, and became merely the crowned symbol of a
Machiavellian scheme. Prussia, Russia, and Austria fell upon and divided Poland.
France was baffled in profound schemes against Spain. Britain circumvented the
«designs of France» in America and acquired Canada, and got the better of
France, in India. And then a remarkable thing occurred, a thing very shocking to
European diplomacy. The British colonies in America flatly refused to have
further part or lot in this game of «Great Powers». They objected that they had
no voice and no great interest in these European schemes and conflicts, and they
refused to bear any portion of the burthen of taxation these foreign policies
entailed. «Taxation without representation is tyranny»; this was their dominant
idea.

Of course this decision to separate did not flash out complete and finished
from the American mind at the beginning of these troubles. In America in the
eighteenth century, just as in England in the seventeenth, there was an entire
willingness, indeed a desire on the part of ordinary men, to leave foreign
affairs in the hands of the king and his ministers. But there was an equally
strong desire on the part of ordinary men to be neither taxed nor interfered
with in their ordinary pursuits. These are incompatible wishes. Common men
cannot shirk world politics and at the same time enjoy private freedom; but it
has taken them countless generations to learn this. The first impulse in the
American revolt against the government in Great Britain was therefore simply a
resentment against, the taxation and interference that followed necessarily from
«foreign, policy» without any clear recognition of what was involved in that
objection. It was only when the revolt was consummated that, the people of the
American colonies recognized at all clearly that' they had repudiated the Great
Power view of life. The sentence in which that, repudiation was expressed was
Washington's injunction to «avoid entangling alliances». For a full century the
united colonies of Great Britain in North America, liberated and independent as
the United States of America, stood apart altogether from the bloodstained
intrigues and conflicts of the European foreign offices. Soon after (1810 to
1823) they were able to extend their principle of detachment to the rest of the
continent, and to make all the New World «out of bounds» for the scheming
expansionists of the old. When at length, in 1917, they were obliged, to
re-enter the arena, of world politics, it was to bring the new spirit and, new
aims their aloofness had enabled them, to develop into the tangle of
international relationships. They were not, however, the first to stand aloof.
Since the treaty of Westphalia (1648) the confederated states of Switzerland, in
their mountain fastnesses, had sustained their right to exclusion from the
schemes of kings and empires.

But since the North American peoples are now to play an increasingly
important; part in our history, it will be well to devote a little more
attention than we have hitherto given to their development. We have already
glanced at this story in (sec 8) of the preceding chapter. We will now tell a
little more fully-though still in the barest outline-what these colonies were,
whose recalcitrance was so disconcerting to the king and ministers of Great
Britain in their diplomatic game against the rest of mankind.

