
36.10 The Revolution of the Jacobins
========================================================================

.. _Figure 867:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0867.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0867.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 867

    Figure 867: Map — Flight of the Varenines

It is quite possible that with the loyal support of the crown and a
reasonable patriotism on the part of the nobility, the National Assembly, in
spite of its noisy galleries, its Rousseauism, and its inexperience, might have
blundered through to a stable form of parliamentary government for France. In
Mirabeau it had a statesman with clear ideas of the needs of the time; he knew
the strength and the defects of the British system, and apparently he had set
himself to establish in France a parallel political organization upon a wider,
more honest franchise. He had, it is true, indulged in a sort of Ruritanian
flirtation with the queen, seen her secretly, pronounced her very solemnly the
«only man» about the king, and made rather a fool of himself in that matter, but
his schemes were drawn upon a much larger scale than the scale of the back
stairs of the Tuileries. By his death in 1791 France certainly lost one of her
most constructive statesmen, and the National Assembly its last chance of any
co-operation with the king. When there is a court there is usually a conspiracy,
and royalist schemes and royalist mischief making were the last straw in the
balance against the National Assembly. The royalists did not care for Mirabeau,
they did not care for France; they wanted to be back in their lost paradise of
privilege, haughtiness, and limitless expenditure, and it seemed to them that if
only they could make the government of the National Assembly impossible, then by
a sort of miracle the dry bones of the ancient regime would live again. They had
no sense of the other possibility, the gulf of the republican extremists, that
yawned at their feet.

One June night in 1791, between eleven o'clock and midnight, the king and
queen and their two children slipped out of the Tuileries disguised, threaded
their palpitating way through Paris, circled round from the north of the city to
the east, and got at last into a traveling -carriage that was, waiting upon the
road to Chalons. They were flying to the army of the east. The army of the east
was «loyal», that is to say, its general and officers at least were prepared to
betray France to the king and court. Here was adventure at last after the
queen's heart, and one can understand the pleasurable excitement of the little
party as the miles lengthened between themselves and Paris. Away over the hills
were reverence, deep bows, and the kissing of hands. Then back to Versailles. A
little shooting of the mob, in Paris artillery, if need be. A few executions but
not of the sort of people who matter. A White Terror for a few months. Then all
would be well again. Perhaps Calonne might return, too, with fresh financial
expedients. He was busy just then gathering support among the German princes.
There were a lot of chateaux to rebuild, but the people who burnt them down
could hardly complain if the task of rebuilding them pressed rather heavily upon
their grimy necks . . .

All such bright anticipations were cruelly dashed that night at Varennes. The
king had been recognized at Sainte Menehould by the landlord of the post house,
and as the night fell, the eastward roads clattered with galloping messengers
rousing the country, and trying to intercept the fugitives. There were fresh
horses waiting in the upper village of Varennes the young officer in charge had
given the king up for the night and gone to bed-while for half an hour in the
lower village the poor king, disguised as a valet, disputed with his
postillions, who had expected reliefs in the lower village and refused to go
further. Finally they consented to go on. They consented too late. The little
party found the postmaster from Sainte Menehould, who had ridden past while the
postillions wrangled, and a number of worthy republicans of Varennes whom he had
gathered together, awaiting them at the bridge between the two parts of the
town. The bridge was barricaded. Muskets were thrust into the carriage: «Your
passports?»

The king surrendered without a struggle. The little party was taken into the
house of some village functionary. «Well», said the king, «here you have me!»
Also he remarked that he was hungry. At dinner be commended the wine, «quite
excellent wine». What the queen said is not recorded. There were royalist troops
at hand, but they attempted no rescue. The tocsin began to ring, and the village
«illuminated itself», to guard against surprise. . . .

A very crestfallen coach load of royalty returned to Paris, and was received
by vast crowds - *in silence.* The word had gone forth that whoever
insulted the king should be thrashed, and whoever applauded him should be killed
. . .

It was only after this foolish exploit that the idea of a republic took hold
of the French mind. Before this flight to Varennes there was no doubt much
abstract republican sentiment, but there was scarcely any expressed disposition
to abolish monarchy in France. Even in July, a month after the flight, a great
meeting in the Champ de Mars, supporting a petition for the dethronement of the
king, was dispersed by the authorities, and many people were killed. But such
displays of firmness could not prevent the lesson of that flight soaking into
men's minds. Just as in England in the days of Charles I, so now in France men
realized that the king could not be, trusted-he was dangerous. The Jacobins grew
rapidly in strength. Their leaders, Robespierre, Danton, Marat, who had hitherto
been figured as impossible extremists, began to dominate French affairs.

These Jacobins were the equivalents of the American radicals, men with
untrammeled advanced ideas. Their strength lay in the fact that they were
unencumbered and downright. They were poor men with nothing to lose. The party
of moderation, of compromise with the relies of the old order, was led by such
men of established position as General Lafayette, the general who had
represented France in America, and Mirabeau, an aristocrat who, was ready to
model himself on the rich and influential aristocrats of England. But
Robespierre was a needy but clever young lawyer from Arras, whose most precious
possession was his faith in Rousseau; Danton was a scarcely more wealthy
barrister in Paris, a big, gesticulating, rhetorical figure; Marat was an older
man, a Swiss of very great scientific distinction, but equally unembarrassed by
possessions. On Marat's scientific, standing it is necessary to lay stress
because there is a sort of fashion among English writers to misrepresent the
leaders of great revolutionary movements as ignorant men. This gives a false
view of the mental processes of revolution; and it is the task of the historian
to correct it. Marat, we find, was conversant with English, Spanish, German, and
Italian; he had spent several years in England, he was made an honorary M.D. of
St. Andrew's, and had published some valuable contributions to medical science
in English, Both Benjamin Franklin and Goethe were greatly interested in his
work in physics. This is the man who is called by Carlyle «rabid dog»,
«atrocious», «squalid», and «Dog-leech» -last by way of tribute to his
science.

The revolution called Marat to politics, and his earliest contributions to
the great discussion were fine and sane. There was a prevalent delusion in
France that England was a land of liberty. His *Tableau des vices de la
constitution d'Angleterre* showed the realities of the English position. His
last years were maddened by an almost intolerable skin disease which he caught
while hiding in the sewers of Paris to escape the consequences of his
denunciation of the king as a traitor after the flight to Varennes. Only by
sitting in a hot bath could he collect his mind to write. He had been treated
hardly and suffered, and he became hard; nevertheless, he stands out in history
as a man of rare, unblemished honesty. His poverty seems particularly to have
provoked the scorn of Carlyle.

«What a road he has travelled; and sits now, about halfpast seven of the
clock, stewing in slipper-bath; sore afflicted; ill of Revolution Fever . . .
Excessively sick and worn, poor man: with precisely eleven pence halfpenny of
ready-money, in paper; with slipper-bath; strong three-footed stool for writing
on, the while: and a squalid Washerwoman for his sole household . . . that is
his civic establishment in Medical-School Street; thither and not elsewhere has
his road led him. . . . Hark, a rap again! A musical woman's voice, refusing to
be rejected: it is the Citoyenne who would do France a service. Marat,
recognizing from within, cries, Admit her. Charlotte Corday is admitted».

The young heroine—for republican leaders are fair game, and their assassins
are necessarily heroines and their voices «musical»—offered to give him some
necessary information about the counter- revolution at Caen, and as he was
occupied in making a note of her facts, she stabbed him with a large sheath
knife (1792) . . .

Such was the quality of most of the leaders of the Jacobin party. They were
men of no property-untethered men. They were more dissociated and more
elemental, therefore, than any other party; and they were ready to push the
ideas of freedom and equality to a logical extremity. Their standards of
patriotic virtue were high and harsh. There was something inhuman even in their
humanitarian zeal. They saw without humour the disposition of the moderates to
ease things down, to keep the common folk just a little needy and respectful,
and royalty (and men of substance) just a little respected. They were blinded by
the formulae of Rousseauism to the historical truth that man is by nature
oppressor and oppressed, and that it is only slowly by law, education, and the
spirit of love in the world that men can be made happy and free.

And while in America the, formulae of eighteenth-century democracy were on
the whole stimulating and helpful because it was already a land of open-air
practical equality so far as white men were concerned, in France these formulae
made a very heady and dangerous mixture for the town populations, because
considerable parts of the towns of France were slums full of dispossessed,
demoralized, degraded, and bitter-spirited people, The Parisian crowd was in a
particularly desperate and dangerous state, because the industries of Paris had
been largely luxury industries, and much of her employment parasitic on the
weaknesses and vices of fashionable life. Now the fashionable world had gone
over the frontier, travellers were restricted, business disordered, and the city
full of unemployed and angry people.

But the royalists, instead of realizing the significance of these Jacobins,
with their dangerous integrity and their dangerous grip upon the imagination of
the mob, had the conceit to think they could make tools of them. The time for
the replacement of the National Assembly under the new-made constitution by the
«Legislative Assembly» was drawing near; and when the Jacobins, with the idea of
breaking up the moderates, proposed to make the members of the National Assembly
ineligible for the Legislative Assembly, the royalists supported them with great
glee, and carried the proposal. They perceived that the Legislative Assembly, so
clipped of all experience, must certainly be a politically incompetent body.
They would «extract good from the excess of evil», and presently France would
fall back helpless into the hands of her legitimate masters. So they thought.
And the royalists did more than this. They backed the election of a Jacobin as
Mayor of Paris. It was about as clever as if a man brought home a hungry tiger
to convince his wife of her need of him. There stood another body ready at hand
with which these royalists did not reckon, far better equipped than the court to
step in and take the place of an ineffective Legislative Assembly, and that was
the strongly Jacobin Commune of Paris installed at the Hotel de Ville.

So far France had been at peace. None of her neighbours had attacked her,
because she appeared to be weakening herself by her internal dissensions. It was
Poland that suffered by the distraction of France. But there seemed no reason
why they should not insult and threaten her, and prepare the way for a later
partition at their convenience. At Pillnitz, in 1791, the King of Prussia and
the Emperor of Austria met, and issued a declaration that the restoration of
order and monarchy in France was a matter of interest to all sovereigns. And an
army of emigres, French nobles and gentlemen, an army largely of officers, was
allowed to accumulate close to the frontier.

It was France that declared war against Austria. The motives of those who
supported this step were conflicting. Many republicans wanted it because they
wished to see the kindred people of Belgium 'liberated from the Austrian yoke.
Many royalists wanted it because they saw in war a possibility of restoring the
prestige of the crown. If Marat opposed it bitterly in his paper *L'Ami du
Peuple,* because he did not want to see republican enthusiasm turned into war
fever. His instinct warned him of Napoleon. On April 20th, 1792, the king came
down to the Assembly and proposed war amidst great applause.

The war began disastrously. Three French armies entered Belgium two were
badly beaten, and the third, under Lafayette, retreated. Then Prussia declared
war in support of Austria, and the allied forces, under the Duke of Brunswick,
prepared to invade France. The duke issued one of the most foolish proclamations
in history; he was, he said, invading France to restore the royal authority. Any
further indignity shown the king he threatened to visit upon the Assembly and
Paris with «military execution». This was surely enough to, make the most
royalist Frenchman a -republican-at least for the duration of the war.

The new phase of revolution, the Jacobin revolution, was the direct outcome
of this proclamation. It made the Legislative Assembly, in which orderly
republicans (Girondins) and royalists prevailed, it made the government which
had put down that republican meeting in the Champ de Mars and hunted Marat into
the sewers, impossible. The insurgents gathered at the Hôtel de Ville, and on
the tenth of August the Commune launched an attack on the palace of the
Tuileries.

The king behaved with a clumsy stupidity, and with that disregard for others
which is the prerogative of kings. He had, with him a Swiss guard of -nearly a
thousand men, as well as National Guards of uncertain loyalty. He held out
vaguely until firing began, and then he went off to the adjacent Assembly to
place himself and his family under its protection, leaving his Swiss, fighting.
No doubt he hoped, to antagonize Assembly and Commune, but the Assembly had none
of the fighting spirit of the Hotel de Ville. The royal refugees were placed in
a box reserved for journalists (out of which a small room opened), and there
they remained for sixteen hours while the Assembly debated their fate. Outside
there were the sounds of a considerable battle; every now and then a window
would break. The unfortunate Swiss were fighting with their backs to the wall
because there, was now nothing else for them to do . . .

The Assembly had no stomach to back the government's action of July in the
Champ, de Mars. The fierce vigour of the Commune dominated it. The king found no
comfort whatever in the Assembly. It scolded him and discussed his «suspension».
The Swiss fought until they received a message from the 'king to desist, and
then -the crowd being savagely angry at the needless bloodshed and out of
control- they were for the most part massacred.

The long and tedious attempt to «Merovingianize» Louis, to make an honest
crowned republican out of a dull and inadaptable absolute monarch; was now
drawing to its tragic close, The Commune of Paris was practically in control of
France. The Legislative Assembly -which had apparently undergone a change of
heart- decreed that the king was suspended from his office, confined him in the
Temple, replaced him by an executive commission, and summoned a National
Convention to frame a new constitution.

The tension of patriotic and republican France was now becoming intolerable.
Such armies as she had were rolling back helplessly towards Paris. Longwy had
fallen, the great fortress of Verdun followed, and nothing seemed likely to stop
the march of the allies upon the capital. The sense of royalist treachery rose
to panic cruelty. At any rate the royalists had to be silenced and stilled and
seared out of sight. The Commune set itself to hunt out every royalist that
could be found, until the prisons of Paris were full. Marat saw the danger of a
massacre. Before it was too late he tried to secure the establishment of
emergency tribunals to filter the innocent from, the guilty in this
miscellaneous collection of schemers, suspects, and harmless gentlefolk. He was
disregarded, and early in September the inevitable massacre occurred.

.. _Figure 874:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0874.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0874.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 874

    Figure 874: Map — France, September 1792

    Map of the north eastern frontier of France, showing the military position September 1792.

Suddenly, first at one prison and then at others, bands of insurgents took
possession. A sort of rough court was constituted, and outside gathered a wild
mob armed with sabres, pikes, and axes.
One by one the prisoners, men and women alike, were led out from their cells,
questioned briefly, pardoned with the cry of «Vive a Nation», or thrust out to
the mob at the gates. There the crowd jostled and fought to get a slash or
thrust at a victim. The condemned were stabbed, backed, and beaten to death,
their heads hewn off, stuck on pikes, and carried about the town, their torn
bodies thrust aside. Among others, the Princesse de Lamballe, whom the king and
queen had left behind in the Tuileries, perished. Her head was carried on a pike
to the Temple for the queen to see.

In the queen's cell were two National Guards. One would have had her look out
and see this grisly sight. The other, in pity, would not let her do so.

Even as this red tragedy was going on in Paris, the French general,
Dumouriez, who had rushed an army from Flanders into the forests of the Argonne,
was holding up the advance of the allies beyond Verdun. On September 20th
occurred a battle, mainly an artillery encounter, at Valmy. A not very resolute
Prussian advance was checked, the French infantry stood firm, their artillery
was better than the allied artillery, For ten days after this repulse the Duke
of Brunswick hesitated, and then be began to fall back towards the Rhine. This
battle at Valmy -it was little more than a cannonade- was one of the decisive
battles in the world's history. The Revolution was saved.

The National Convention met on September 21st, 1792, and immediately
proclaimed a republic. The trial and execution of the king followed with a sort
of logical necessity upon these things. He died rather as a symbol than as a
man. There was nothing else to be done with him; poor man, he cumbered the
earth. France could not let him go to hearten the emigrants, could not keep him
harmless at home; his existence threatened her. Marat had urged this trial
relentlessly, yet with that acid clearness of his he would not have the king
charged with any offence committed before he signed the constitution, because
before then he was a real monarch, super-legal, and so incapable of being
illegal. Nor would Marat permit attacks upon the king's counsel . . . Throughout
Marat played a bitter and yet often a just part; he was a great man, a fine
intelligence, in a skin of fire; wrung with that organic hate in the blood that
is not a product of the mind but of the body.

Louis was beheaded in January, 1793. He was guillotined for since the
previous August the guillotine had been in use as the official instrument in
French executions.

Danton, in his leonine role, was very fine upon this occasion. «The kings of
Europe would challenge us», he roared. «We throw them the head of a king!»

