
36.11 The Jacobin Republic 1792-1794
========================================================================
And now followed a strange phase in the history of the French people. There
arose a great flame of enthusiasm for France and the Republic. There was to be
an end to compromise at home and abroad; at home royalists and every form of
disloyalty were to be stamped out; abroad France was to be the protector and
helper of all revolutionaries. All Europe, all the world, was to become
republican. The youth of France poured into the Republican armies; a new and
wonderful song spread through the land, a song that still warms the blood like
wine, the Marseillaise. Before that chant and the leaping columns of French
bayonets and their enthusiastically served guns the foreign armies rolled back;
before the end of 1792 the French armies had gone far beyond the utmost
achievements of Louis XIV; everywhere they stood on foreign soil. They were in
Brussels, they had overrun Savoy, they had raided to Mayence; they had seized
the Scheldt from Holland. Then the French Government did an unwise thing. It had
been exasperated by the expulsion of its representative from England upon the
execution of Louis, and it declared war against England. It was an unwise thing
to do, because the revolution which had given France a new enthusiastic infantry
and a brilliant artillery, released from its aristocratic officers and many
cramping traditions, had destroyed the discipline of its navy, and the English
were supreme upon the sea. And this provocation united all England against
France, whereas there had been at first a very considerable liberal movement in
Great Britain in sympathy with the revolution.

Of the fight that France made in the next few years against a European
coalition we cannot tell in any detail. She drove the Austrians forever out of
Belgium, and made Holland a republic. The Dutch fleet, frozen in the Texel,
surrendered to a handful of cavalry without firing its guns. For some time the
French thrust towards Italy was hung up, and it was only in 1796 that a new
general, Napoleon Bonaparte, led the ragged and hungry republican armies in
triumph across Piedmont to Mantua and Verona. An *Outline of History*
cannot map out campaigns; but of the new quality that had come into war, it is
bound to take note. The old professional armies had fought for the fighting, as
slack as workers, paid by the hour; these wonderful new armies fought, hungry
and thirsty, for victory. Their enemies called them the «New French». Says C. F.
Atkinson,\ [#fn6]_  «What astonished the Allies most of all was the number and the
velocity of the Republicans. These improvised armies had in fact nothing to
delay them. Tents were unprocurable for want of money, untransportable for want
of the enormous number of wagons that would have been required, and also
unnecessary, for the discomfort that would have caused wholesale desertion in
professional armies was cheerfully borne by the men of 1793-94. Supplies for
armies of then unheard-of size could not; be carried in convoys, and the French
soon became familiar with living on the country. Thus 1793 saw the birth of the
modern system of war -rapidity of movement, full development of, national
strength, bivouacs, requisitions and force as against cautious, manoeuvring,
small professional armies, tents and full rations, and chicane. The first
represented the decision-compelling spirit, the second the spirit of risking
little to gain a little..».

And while these ragged hosts of enthusiasts were chanting the Marseillaise
and fighting for *La France,* manifestly never quite clear in their, minds
whether they were looting or liberating the countries into which they poured,
the republican enthusiasm in Paris was spending itself in a far less glorious
fashion. Marat, the one man of commanding intelligence among the Jacobins, was
now frantic with an incurable disease, and presently he was murdered; Danton was
a series, of patriotic thunderstorms; the steadfast fanaticism of Robespierre
dominated the situation. This man is difficult to judge; he was a man of poor
physique, naturally timid, and a prig. But he had that most necessary gift for
power, faith. He believed not in a god familiar to men, but in a certain Supreme
Being, and that Rousseau was his prophet. He set himself to save the, republic
as he conceived it, and, he imagined it could be saved by no other man than he.
So that to keep in power was to have the republic. The living spirit of the
republic, it seemed had sprung from a slaughter of royalists and the execution
of the king. There were insurrections: one in the west, in the district of La
Vendée, where the people rose against the conscription and against the
dispossession of the orthodox clergy, and were led by noblemen and priests; one
in the south, where Lyons and Marseilles had risen and the royalists of Toulon
had admitted an English and Spanish garrison. To which there seemed no more
effectual reply than to go on killing royalists.

Nothing could have better pleased the fierce heart of the Paris slums. The
Revolutionary Tribunal went to work, and a steady slaughtering began.\ [#fn7]_  The
invention of the guillotine was opportune to this mood. The queen was
guillotined, most of Robespierre's antagonists were guillotined, atheists who
argued that there was no Supreme Being were guillotined, Danton was guillotined
because he thought there was too much guillotine; day by day, week by week, this
infernal new machine chopped off heads and more heads and more. The reign of
Robespierre lived, it seemed, on blood, and needed more and more, as an
opium-taker needs more and more opium.

Danton was still Danton, leonine and exemplary upon the guillotine. «Danton»,
he said, «no weakness!»

And the grotesque thing about the story is that Robespierre was indubitably
honest. He was far more honest than any of the group of men who succeeded him.
He was inspired by a consuming passion for a new order of human life. So far as
he could contrive it, the Committee of Public Safety, the emergency government
of twelve which had now thrust aside the Convention, *constructed.* The
scale on which it sought to construct was stupendous. All the intricate problems
with which we still struggle today were met by swift and shallow solutions.
Attempts were made to equalize property. «Opulence», said St. Just, «is
infamous». The property of the rich was taxed or confiscated in order that it
should be divided among the poor. Every man was to have a secure house, a
living, a wife and children. The labourer was worthy of his hire, but not
entitled to an advantage. There was an attempt to abolish profit altogether, the
rude incentive of most human commerce since the beginning of society. Profit is
the economic riddle that still puzzles us today. There were harsh laws against
«profiteering» in France in 1793—England in 1919 found it necessary to make
quite similar laws. And the Jacobien government not only replanned -in eloquent
outline- the economic, but also the social system.

Divorce was made as easy as marriage; the distinction of legitimate and
illegitimate children was abolished . . . A new calendar was devised, with new
names for the months, a week of ten days, and the like that has long since been
swept, away; but also the clumsy coinage and the tangled weights and measures of
old France gave place to the simple and. lucid decimal system that still endures
. . . There was a proposal from one extremist group to abolish, God among other
institutions altogether, and to substitute the worship of Reason. There was,
indeed, a Feast of Reason in the cathedral of Notre-Dame, with a pretty actress
as the goddess of Reason. But against this Robespierre set his face; he was no
atheist. «Atheism», he said, «is aristocratic. The idea of a Supreme Being who
watches over oppressed innocence and punishes triumphant crime is essentially
the idea of the people».

So he guillotined Hébert, who had celebrated the, Feast of Reason, and all
his party.

A certain mental disorder became perceptible, in Robespierre as the summer of
1794 drew on. He was deeply concerned with his religion. (The arrests and
executions of suspects were going on now as briskly as ever. Through the streets
of Paris every day rumbled the Terror with its carts full of condemned people.)
He induced the Convention to decree that France believed in a Supreme Being, and
in that comforting doctrine, the immortality of the soul. In June he celebrated
a great festival, the festival of his Supreme Being. There was a procession to
the Champ de Mars, which he headed, brilliantly arrayed, bearing a great bunch
of flowers and wheat ears. Figures of inflammatory material, representing
Atheism and Vice, were solemnly burnt; then, by an ingenious mechanism, and with
some slight creakings, an incombustible statue of Wisdom rose in their place.
There were discourses -Robespierre delivered the chief one- but apparently no
worship . . .

Thereafter Robespierre displayed a disposition to brood aloof from affairs.
For a month he kept away from the Convention.

One day in July he reappeared and delivered a strange speech that clearly
foreshadowed fresh prosecutions. «Gazing on the multitude of vices which the
torrent of Revolution has rolled down», he cried, in his last great speech in
the Convention, «I have sometimes trembled lest I should be soiled by the impure
neighbourhood of wicked men . . . I know that it is easy for the leagued tyrants
of the world to, overwhelm a single individual; but I know also what is the duty
of a man who can die in the defence of humanity». . . .

And so on to vague utterances that seemed to threaten everyone.

The Convention heard this speech in silence; then when a proposal was made to
print and circulate it, broke into a resentful uproar and refused permission.
Robespierre went off in bitter resentment to the club of his supporters, and
*re-read his speech to them!*

That night was full of talk and meetings and preparations for the morrow, and
the next morning the Convention turned upon Robespierre. One Tallien threatened
him with a dagger. When he tried to speak, he was shouted down, and the
President jingled the bell at him. «President of Assassins», cried Robespierre,
«I demand speech!» It was refused him. His voice deserted him; he coughed and
spluttered. «The blood of Danton chokes him», cried someone.

He was accused and arrested there and then with his chief supporters.

Whereupon the Hotel de Ville, still' stoutly Jacobin, rose against the
Convention, and Robespierre and his companions were snatched out of the hands of
their captors. There was a night of gathering, marching, counter-marching; and
at last, about three in the morning; the forces of the Convention faced the form
of the Commune outside the Hotel de Ville. Henriot, the Jacobin commander, after
a busy day was drunk upstairs; a parley ensued, and then, after some indecision,
the soldiers of the Commune went over to the Government. There was a shouting of
patriotic sentiments, and someone looked out from the Hotel de Ville.
Robespierre and his last companions found themselves betrayed and trapped.

Two or three of these men threw themselves out of a window, and injured
themselves frightfully on the railings below without killing themselves. Others
attempted suicide. Robespierre, it seems, was shot in the lower jaw by a
gendarme. He was found, his eyes staring from a pale face whose lower part was
blood.

Followed seventeen hours of agony before his end. He spoke never a word
during that time, his jaw being bound up roughly in dirty linen. He and his
companions, and the broken, dying bodies of, those who, had jumped from the
windows, twenty-two men altogether, were taken to the guillotine instead of the
condemned, appointed for that day. Mostly his eyes were closed, but, says
Carlyle, he opened them to see the great knife rising above him, and struggled.
Also it would seem he screamed when the executioner removed his bandages. Then
the knife came down, swift and merciful.

The Terror was at an end. From first to last there had been condemned and
executed about four thousand people.

.. [#fn6] In his article, "French Revolutionary Wars," Encyclopaedia Britannica.

.. [#fn7] In the thirteen months before June, 1794, there were 1,229 executions; in the following seven weeks there were 1,376. —P.G.
