
36.12 The Directory
========================================================================
It witnesses to the immense vitality and the profound rightness of the flood
of new ideals and intentions that the French Revolution had released into the
world of practical endeavour, that it could still flow in a creative torrent
after it had been caricatured and mocked, in the grotesque personality and
career of Robespierre. He had shown its deepest, thoughts, he had displayed
anticipations of its methods and conclusions; through the green and distorting
lenses of his preposterous vanity and egotism, he had smeared and blackened all
its hope and promise with blood and horror, and the power of those ideas was not
destroyed. They stood the extreme tests of ridiculous and horrible presentation.
After his downfall, the Republic still ruled unassailable. Leaderless, for his
successors were a group of crafty or commonplace men, the European republic
struggled on and presently fell and rose again, and fell and rose and still
struggles, entangled but invincible.

And it is well to remind the reader here, of the real dimensions of this
phase of the Terror, which strikes so vividly upon the imagination and which has
therefore been enormously exaggerated relatively to the rest of the revolution.
From 1789 to late in 1791 the French Revolution was an orderly process, and from
the summer of 1794 the Republic was an orderly and victorious state. The Terror
was not the work of the whole country, but of the town mob which owed its
existence and its savagery to the misrule, and social injustice of the ancient
régime; and the explosion of the Terror could have happened only through the
persistent treacherous disloyalty of the royalists which, while it raised the
extremists to frenzy, disinclined the mass of moderate republicans from any
intervention. The best men were busy fighting the Austrians and royalists on the
frontier. Altogether, we must remember, the total of the killed in the Terror
amounted to a few thousand, and among those thousands there were certainly a
great number of active antagonists whom the Republic, by all the standards of
that time, was entitled to kill. It included such traitors and mischiefmakers as
Philip, Duke of Orleans of the Palais Royal, who had voted for the death of
Louis XVI. More lives were wasted by the British generals alone on the opening
day of what is known as the Somme offensive of July, 1916 than in the whole
French revolution from start to finish. We hear so much about the martyrs of the
French Terror because they were notable, well-connected people, and because
there has been a sort of propaganda of their sufferings. But let us balance
against them in our minds what was going on in the prisons of the world
generally at that time. In Britain and America, while the Terror ruled in
France, far more people were slaughtered for offences—very often quite trivial
offences- against property than were condemned by the Revolutionary Tribunal for
treason against the State. Of course, they were very common people indeed, but
in their rough way they suffered. A girl was hanged in Massachusetts in 1789 for
forcibly taking the hat, shoes, and buckles of another girl she had met in the
street.\ [#fn8]_  Again, Howard the philanthropist (about 1773) found a number of
perfectly innocent people detained in the English prisons who had been tried and
acquitted, but were unable to pay the jailer's fees. And these prisons were
filthy places under no effective control. Torture was still in use in the
Hanoverian dominions of his Britannic majesty King George III. It had been in
use in France up to the time of the National Assembly. These things mark the
level of the age. It is not on record that anyone was deliberately tortured by
the French revolutionaries during the Terror. Those few hundreds of French
gentlefolk fell into a pit that most of them had been well content should exist
for others. It was tragic, but not, by the scale of universal history, a great
tragedy. The common man in France was more free, better off, and happier during
the «Terror» than he had been in 1787.

The story of the Republic after the summer of 1791 becomes a tangled story of
political groups aiming at everything from a radical republic to a royalist
reaction, but pervaded by a general desire for some definite working arrangement
even at the price of considerable concessions.

There was a series of insurrections of the Jacobins and of the royalists,
there seems to have been what we should call nowadays a hooligan class in Paris
which was quite ready to turn out to fight and loot on either side; nevertheless
the Convention produced a government, the Directory of five members, which held
France together for five years. The last, most threatening revolt of all, in
October, 1795, was suppressed with great skill and decision by a rising young
general, Napoleon Bonaparte.

The Directory was victorious abroad, but uncreative at home; its members were
far too anxious to stick to the sweets and glories of office to prepare a
constitution that would supersede them, and far too dishonest to handle the task
of financial and economic reconstruction demanded by the condition of France. We
need only note two of their names, Carnot, who was an honest republican, and
Barras, who was conspicuously a rogue. Their reign of five years formed a
curious interlude in this history of great changes. They took things as they
found them. The propagandist zeal of the revolution carried the French armies
into Holland, Belgium, Switzerland, south Germany, and north Italy. Everywhere
kings were expelled and republics set up. But such propagandist zeal as animated
the Directorate did not prevent the looting of the treasures of the liberated
peoples to relieve the financial embarrassment of the, French Government. Their
wars became less and less the holy war of freedom, and more and more like the
aggressive wars of the ancient regime. The last feature of Grand Monarchy that
France was disposed to discard was her tradition of foreign policy, grasping,
aggressive, restless, French centred. One discovers it still as vigorous under
the Directorate as if there had been no revolution.

.. [#fn8] Channing, vol iii. chap. xviii.
