
36.13 The Pause in Reconstruction and the Dawn of Modern Socialism
========================================================================
The ebb of this tide of Revolution in the world, this tide which had created
the great Republic of America and threatened to submerge all European
monarchies, was now at hand. It is as if something had thrust up from beneath
the surface of human affairs, made a, gigantic effort, and for a time spent
itself. It swept many obsolescent and evil things away, but many evil andunjust
things remained. It solved many problems, and it left the desire for fellowship
and order face to face with much vaster problems that it seemed only to have
revealed. Privilege of certain types had gone, many tyrannies, much religious
persecution. When these things of the ancient regime had vanished, it seemed as
if they had never mattered. What did matter was that for all their votes and
enfranchisement, and in spite of all their passion and effort, common men were
still not free and not enjoying an equal happiness; that the immense promise and
air of a new world with which the Revolution had come, remained unfulfilled.

Yet, after all, this wave of revolution had realized nearly everything that
had been clearly thought out before it came. It was not failing now for want of
impetus, but for want of finished ideas. Many things that had oppressed mankind
were swept away forever. Now that they were swept away it became apparent how
unprepared men were for the creative opportunities this clearance gave them. And
periods of revolution are periods of action; in them men reap the harvests of
ideas that have grown during phases of interlude, and they leave the fields
cleared for a new season of growth, but they cannot suddenly produce ripened new
ideas to meet an unanticipated riddle.

The sweeping away of king and lord, of priest and inquisitor, of landlord and
tax gatherer and taskmaster, left the mass of men face to face for the first
time with certain very fundamental aspects of the social structure,
relationships they had taken for granted, and had never realized the need of
thinking hard and continuously about before. Institutions that had seemed to be
in the nature of things, and matters that had seemed to happen by the same sort
of necessity that brought round the dawn and springtime, were discovered to be
artificial, controllable, were they not so perplexingly intricate, and now that
the old routines were abolished and done away with in urgent need of control.
The New Order found itself confronted with three riddles which it was quite
unprepared to solve: Property, Currency, and International Relationship.

Let us take these three problems in order, and ask what they are and how they
arose in human affairs. Every human life is deeply entangled in them, and
concerned in their solution. The rest of this history becomes more and more
clearly the development of the effort to solve these problems; that is to say,
so to interpret property, so to establish currency, and so to control
international reactions as to render possible a world-wide, Progressive, and
happy community of will. They are the three riddles of the sphinx of fate, to
which the human commonweal must find an answer or perish.

The idea of property arises out of the combative instincts of the species.
Long before men were men, the ancestral ape was a proprietor. Primitive Property
is what a beast will fight for. The clog and his bone, the tigress and her lair,
the roaring stag and his herd, these are proprietorship blazing. No more
nonsensical expression is conceivable in sociology than the term «primitive
communism». The Old Man of the family tribe of early Paleolithic times insisted
upon his proprietorship in his wives and daughters, in his tools, in his visible
universe. If any other man wandered into his visible universe he fought him, and
if he could he slew him. The tribe grew in the course of ages, as Atkinson
showed convincingly in big Primal Law by the gradual toleration by the Old Man
of the existence of the younger men, and of their proprietorship in the wives
they captured from outside the tribe, and in the tools and ornaments they made,
and the game they slew. Human society grew by a compromise between this one's,
property, and that. It was largely a compromise and an alliance forced upon men
by the, necessity of driving some other tribe out of its visible universe. If,
the hills and forests and streams were not your land or my land it was because
they had to be our land. Each of us would have preferred to have it my land, but
that would not work. In that case the other fellows would have destroyed us.
Society, therefore, is from its beginnings the mitigation of ownership.
Ownership in the beast and in the primitive savage was far more intense a thing
than it is in the civilized world today. It is rooted more strongly, in our
instincts than in our reason.

In the natural savage and in the untutored man today for it is well to keep
in mind that no man today is more than four hundred generations from the
primordial savage -there is no limitation to the sphere of ownership. Whatever
you can fight for, you can own; women-folk, spared captive, captured beast,
forest glade, stone pit or what not. As the community grew and a sort of law
came to restrain internecine fighting, men developed rough and ready methods of
settling proprietorship. Men could own what they were the first to make or
capture or claim. It seemed natural that a debtor who could not pay up should
become the property of his creditor. Equally natural was it that, after claiming
a patch of land (''Bags I», as the schoolboy says), a man should exact payments
and tribute from anyone else who wanted to use it. It was only slowly, as the
possibilities of organized life dawned on men, that this unlimited property in
anything whatever began to be recognized as a nuisance. Men found themselves
born into a universe all owned and claimed, nay! they found themselves born
owned and claimed. The social struggles of the earlier civilization are
difficult to trace now, but the history we have told of the Roman republic shows
a community waking up to the idea that they may become a public inconvenience
and should then be repudiated, and that the unlimited ownership of land is also
an inconvenience. We find that later Babylonia severely limited the rights of
property in slaves. Finally, we find in the teaching of that great
revolutionist, Jesus of Nazareth, such an attack upon property as had never been
before. Easier it was, he said, for a camel to go through the eye of a needle
than for the owner of great possessions to enter the kingdom of heaven. A
steady, continuous criticism of the permissible scope of property seems to have
been going on in the world for the last twenty-five or thirty centuries.
Nineteen hundred years after Jesus of Nazareth we find all the world that has
come under the Christian teaching persuaded that there could be no property in
persons. There has been a turnover in the common conscience in that matter. And
also the idea that «a man may do what he likes with his own» was clearly very
much shaken in relation to other sorts of property. But this world of the
closing eighteenth century was still only in the interrogative stage in this
matter. It had got nothing clear enough, much less settled enough, to act upon.
One of its primary impulses was to protect property against the greed and waste
of kings and the exploitation of noble adventurers. It was to protect private
property that the Revolution began. But its equalitarian formulae carried it
into a criticism of the very property it had risen to protect. How can men be
free and equal when numbers of them have no ground to stand upon and nothing to
eat, and the owners will neither feed nor lodge them unless they toil?
Excessively -the poor complained.

To which riddle the Jacobin reply was to set about «dividing up». They wanted
to intensify and universalize property. Aiming at the same end by another route,
there were already in the eighteenth century certain primitive socialists -or,
to be more exact, communists- who wanted to «abolish» private property
altogether. The state (a democratic state was of course understood) was to own
all property. It was only as the nineteenth century developed that men began to
realize that property was not one simple thing, but a great complex of
ownerships of different values and consequences, that many things (such as human
beings, the implements of an artist, clothing, tooth-brushes) are very
profoundly and incurably personal property, and that there is a very great range
of things, railways, machinery of various sorts, homes, cultivated gardens,
pleasure-boats, for example, which need each to be considered very particularly
to determine how far and under what limitations it may come under private
ownership, and how far it falls into the public domain and may be administered
and let out by the state in the collective interest. On the practical side these
questions pass into politics, and the problem of making and sustaining efficient
state administration. They open up issues in social psychology, and interact
with the enquiries of educational science. We have today the advantage of a
hundred and thirty years of discussion over the first revolutionary generation,
but even now this criticism of property is still a vast and passionate ferment
rather than a science. Under the circumstances it was impossible that eighteenth
century France should present any other spectacle than that of vague and
confused popular movements seeking to dispossess owners, and classes of small
and large owners holding on grimly, demanding, before everything else, law,
order, and security, and seeking to increase their individual share of anything
whatever that could be legally possessed.

Closely connected with the vagueness of men's ideas about property was the
vagueness of their ideas about currency. Both the American and the French
republics fell into serious trouble upon this score. Here, again, we deal with
something that is not simple, a tangle of usages, conventions, laws, and
prevalent mental habits, out of which arise problems which admit of no solution
in simple terms, and which yet are of vital importance to the everyday life of
the community. The validity of the acknowledgment a man is given for a day's
work is manifestly of quite primary importance to the working of the social
machine. The growth of confidence in the precious metals and of coins, until the
assurance became practically universal that good money could be trusted to have
its purchasing power anywhere, must have been a gradual one in human history.
And being fairly established, this assurance was subjected to very considerable
strains and perplexities by the action of governments in debasing currency and
in substituting paper promises to pay for the actual metallic coins. Every age
produced a number of clever people intelligent enough to realize the
opportunities for smart operations afforded by the complex of faiths and
fictions upon which the money system rested, and sufficiently unsound morally to
give their best energies to growing rich and so getting people to work for them,
through tricks and tampering with gold, coinage, and credit. So soon as serious
political and social dislocation occurred, the money mechanism began to, work
stiffly and inaccurately. The United States and the French Republic both started
their careers in a phase of financial difficulty. Everywhere governments had
been borrowing and issuing paper promises to pay interest, more interest than
they could conveniently raise. Both revolutions led to much desperate public
spending and borrowing, and at the same time to an interruption of cultivation
and production that further diminished real taxable wealth. Both governments,
being unable to pay their way in gold, resorted to the issue of paper money,
promising to pay upon the security of undeveloped land (in America) or recently
confiscated church lands (France). In both cases the amount of issue went far
beyond the confidence of men in the now security. Gold was called in, hidden by
the cunning ones, or went abroad to pay for imports; and people found themselves
with various sorts of bills and notes in the place of coins, all of uncertain
and diminishing value.

However complicated the origins of currency, its practical effect and the end
it has to, serve in the community may be stated roughly in simple terms. The
money a man receives for his work (mental or bodily) or for relinquishing his
property in some consumable good, must ultimately be able to purchase for him
for his use a fairly equivalent amount of consumable goods. («Consumable goods»
is a phrase we would have understood in the widest sense to represent even such
things as a journey, a lecture or theatrical entertainment, housing, medical
advice, and so forth.) When everyone in a community is assured of this, and
assured that the money will not deteriorate in purchasing Power, then currency
and the distribution of goods by trade is in a, healthy and satisfactory state.
Then men will work cheerfully, and only then. The imperative need for that
steadfastness and security of currency is the fixed datum from which the
scientific study and control of currency must begin. But under the most stable
conditions there will always, be fluctuations in currency value. The sum total
of saleable consumable goods in the world and in various countries varies from
year to year and from season to season; autumn is probably a time of plenty, in
comparison with spring; with an increase in the available goods, in the world,
the purchasing power of currency will increase, unless there is also an increase
in the amount of currency. On the other hand, if there is a diminution in the
production of consumable goods or a great, and unprofitable destruction of
consumable goods, such as occurs in a war, the share of the total of consumable
goods represented by a sum of money will diminish and prices and wages will
rise. In modern war the explosion of a single big shell, even if it hits
nothing, destroys labour and material roughly equivalent to a comfortable
cottage or a year's holiday for a man. If the shell hits anything, then that
further destruction has to be added to the diminution of consumable goods. Every
shell that burst in the recent war diminished by a little fraction the
purchasing value of every coin in the whole world. If there is also an increase
of currency during a period when consumable goods are being used up and not
fully replaced and the necessities of revolutionary and war-making governments
almost always require this then the enhancement of prices and the fall in the
value of the currency paid in wages is still greater. Usually also governments
under these stresses borrow money; that is to say, they issue interest bearing
paper, secured on the willingness and ability, of the general community to
endure taxation. Such operations would be difficult enough if they were carried
out frankly by perfectly honest men, in the full light of publicity and
scientific knowledge. But hitherto this has never been the case; at every point
the clever egotist, the bad sort of rich man, is trying to deflect things a
little to, his own advantage. Everywhere, too, one finds the stupid egotist
ready to take fright and break into panic. Consequently we presently, discover
the state encumbered by an excess of currency, which is in effect a
non-interest-paying debt, and also with a great burthen of interest upon loans.
Both credit and currency begin to fluctuate wildly with the evaporation of
public confidence. They are, we say, demoralized.

The ultimate consequence of an entirely demoralized currency would be to end
all work and all trade that could not be carried on by payment in kind and
barter. Men would refuse to work except for food, clothing, housing, and payment
in kind. The immediate consequence of a partially demoralized currency is to
drive up prices and make trading feverishly adventurous and workers suspicious
and irritable. A sharp man wants under such conditions to hold money for as
brief a period as possible; he demands the utmost for his reality, and buys a
reality again as soon as possible in order to get this perishable stuff, the
currency paper, off his hands. All who have fixed incomes and saved
accumulations suffer by the rise in prices, and the wage-earners find, with a
gathering fury, that the real value of their wages is continually less. Here is
a state of affairs where the duty of every clever person is evidently to help
adjust and reassure. But all the traditions of private enterprise, all the ideas
of the later eighteenth century, went to justify the action of acute-minded and
dexterous people who set themselves to accumulate claims, titles, and tangible
property in the storms and dislocations of this currency breakdown. The number
of understanding people in the world who were setting themselves sincerely and
simply to restore honest find workable currency and credit conditions were few
and ineffectual. Most of the financial and speculative people of the time were
playing the part of Cornish wreckers not apparently with any conscious
dishonesty, but with the completest self- approval and the applause of their
fellow-men. The aim of every clever person was to accumulate as much as he could
of really negotiable wealth, and then, and only then, to bring about some sort
of stabilizing political process that would leave him in advantageous possession
of his accumulation. Here were the factors of a bad economic atmosphere,
suspicious, feverish, greedy, and speculative . . .

In the third direction in which the Revolution had been unprepared with clear
ideas, the problem of international relationships, developments were to occur
that interacted disastrously with this state of financial and economic
adventure, this scramble and confusion, this preoccupation of men's minds with,
the perplexing slipperiness of their private property and their monetary
position at home. The Republic at its birth found itself at war. For a time that
war was waged by the new levies with a patriotism and a zeal unparalleled in the
world's history. But that could not go on. The Directory found itself at the
head of a conquering country, intolerably needy and embarrassed at home, and in
occupation of rich foreign lands, full of sizable wealth and material and
financial opportunity. We have all double natures, and the French in particular
seem to be developed logically and symmetrically on, both sides. Into these
conquered regions France came as a liberator, the teacher of Republicanism to
mankind. Holland and Belgium became the Batavian Republic, Genoa and its Riviera
the Ligurian Republic, north Italy the Cisalpine Republic, Switzerland was
rechristened the Helvetian Republic, Mulhausen, Rome, and Naples were designated
republics. Grouped about France, these republics were to be a constellation of
freedom leading the world. That was the ideal side. At the same time the French
government, and French private individuals in concert with the government,
proceeded to a complete, and exhaustive exploitation of the resources, of these
liberated lands.

So within ten years of the meeting of the States General, New France begins
to take on a singular likeness to the old. It is more flushed, more vigorous; it
wears a cap of liberty instead of a crown; it has a new army but a damaged
fleet; it has new rich people instead of the old rich people, a new peasantry,
working even harder than the old and yielding more taxes, a new foreign policy
curiously like the old foreign policy disrobed, and there is no Millennium.
