
36.2 The Thirteen Colonies Before their Revolt
========================================================================

.. _Figure 830:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0830.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0830.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 830

    Figure 830: The American Colonies, 1760

The extent of the British colonies in America in the early half of the
eighteenth century is shown in the accompanying map. The darker shading
represents the districts settled in 1700, the lighter the growth of the
settlements up to 1760. It will be seen that the colonies were a mere fringe of
population along the coast, spreading gradually inland and finding in the
Allegheny and Blue Mountains a very serious barrier. Among the oldest of these
settlements was the colony of Virginia, the name of which commemorates Queen
Elizabeth, the Virgin Queen of England. The first expedition to found a colony
in Virginia was made by Sir Walter Raleigh in 1584, but there was no permanent
settlement at that time; and the real beginnings of Virginia date from the
foundation of the Virginia Company in 1606 in the reign of James I (1603-25).
The story of John Smith and the early founders of Virginia and of how the Indian
«princess» Pocahontas married one of his gentlemen is an English classic.\ [#fn1]_  In
growing tobacco the Virginians found the beginning of prosperity. At the same
time that the Virginian Company was founded, the Plymouth Company obtained a
charter for the settlement of the country to the north of Long Island Sound, to
which the English laid claim. But it was only in 1620 that the northern region
began to be settled, and that under-fresh charters. The settlers of the northern
region (New England), which became Connecticut, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, and
Massachusetts, were men of a different stamp to the Virginia people. They were
Protestants discontented with the Anglican Church compromise, and,
republican-spirited men hopeless of resistance to the Grand Monarchy of James I
and Charles I.

Their pioneer ship was the *Mayflower,* which founded New Plymouth in
1620. The dominant northern colony was Massachusetts. Differences in religious
method and in ideas of toleration led to the separation of the three other
Puritan colonies from Massachusetts. It illustrates the scale upon which things
were done in those days that the whole state of New Hampshire was claimed as
belonging to a certain Captain John Mason, and that he offered to, sell it to
the king (King Charles II in 1671) in exchange for, the right to import 300 tons
of French wine free of duty-an: offer which was refused. The present state of
Maine was bought by Massachusetts from its alleged owner for twelve hundred and
fifty pounds.

In the Civil War that ended with the decapitation of Charles I the sympathies
of New England were for the Parliament, and Virginia was Cavalier; but two
hundred and fifty miles separated these settlements, and there were no serious
hostilities. With the return of the monarchy in 1660, there was a vigorous
development of British colonization in America. Charles II and his associates
were greedy for gain, and the, British crown had no wish to make any further
experiments in illegal taxation at home. But the undefined relations of the
colonies to the crown and the British government seemed to afford promise of
financial adventure across the Atlantic. There was a rapid development of
plantations and proprietary colonies. Lord Baltimore had already in 1632 set up
a colony that was, to be a home of religious freedom for Catholics under the
attractive name of Maryland, to the north and east of Virginia; and now the
Quaker Penn (whose father had rendered valuable services to Charles II)
established himself to the north at Philadelphia and founded the colony of
Pennsylvania. Its main boundary with Maryland and Virginia was delimited by two
men, Mason and Dixon, whose «Mason and Dixon's Line» was destined to become a
very important line indeed in the later affairs of the United States. Carolina,
which was originally an unsuccessful French Protestant establishment, and which
owed its name not to Charles (Carolus) II of England, but to Charles IX of
France, had fallen into English hands and was settled at several points. Between
Maryland and New England stretched a number of small Dutch and Swedish
settlements, of which the chief town was New Amsterdam. These settlements were
captured from the Dutch by the British in 1664, lost again in 1673, and restored
by treaty when Holland and England made peace in 1674. Thereby the whole coast
from Maine to Carolina became in some form or other a British possession.

To the south the Spanish were established; their headquarters were at Fort
St. Augustine in Florida, and in 1732, the town of Savannah was settled by a
philanthropist Oglethorpe from England, who had taken pity on the miserable
people imprisoned for debt in England, and rescued a number of them from prison
to become the founders of a new colony, Georgia, which was to be a bulwark
against the Spanish. So by the middle of the eighteenth century we have these
settlements along the American coastline: the New England group of Puritans and
free Protestants, Maine (belonging to Massachusetts), New Hampshire,
Connecticut, Rhode Island, and Massachusetts; the captured Dutch group, which
was now divided up into New York (New Amsterdam rechristened), New Jersey, and
Delaware (Swedish before it was Dutch, and in its earliest British phase
attached to Pennsylvania); then came Catholic Maryland; Cavalier Virginia;
Carolina (which was presently divided into North and, South) 'and Oglethorpe's
Georgia. Later on: a number of, Tyrolese Protestants took refuge in Georgia, and
there was a considerable immigration of a good class of German cultivators into
Pennsylvania.

Such wore the miscellaneous origins of the citizens of the Thirteen Colonies;
the possibility of their ever becoming closely united would have struck an
impartial observer in 1760 as being very slight. Superadded to the initial
differences of origin; fresh differences were created by climate. North of the
Mason and Dixon line farming was practiced mainly upon British or Central
'European lines by free white cultivators. The settled country of New England
took on a likeness to the English countryside; considerable areas of
Pennsylvania developed fields and farmhouses like those of South Germany. The
distinctive conditions in the north had, socially, important effects. Masters
and men had to labour together as backwoodsmen and were equalized in the
process. They did not start equally; many «servants» are mentioned in the roster
of the *Mayflower.* But they rapidly became equal under colonial
conditions; there was, for instance, a vast tract of land to be had for the
taking, and the «servant» went off and took land like his master. The English
class system disappeared. Under colonial conditions there arose equality «in the
faculties both of body and mind», and an individual independence of judgment
impatient of interference from England. But south of the Mason and Dixon line
tobacco growing began, and the warmer climate encouraged the establishment of
plantations with gang labour. Red Indian captives were tried, but found to be
too, homicidal; Cromwell sent Irish prisoners of war to Virginia, which did much
to reconcile the Royalist planters to republicanism; convicts were sent out, and
there was a considerable trade in kidnapped children, who were «spirited away»
to America to become apprentices or bond slaves. But the most convenient form of
gang labour proved to be that of negro slaves. The first negro slaves were
brought to Jamestown in Virginia by a Dutch ship as early as 1620. By 1700 negro
slaves were scattered all over the states, but Virginia, Maryland, and the
Carolinas were their chief regions of employment, and while the communities to
the north were communities of not very rich and not very poor farming men, the
south developed a type of large proprietor and a white community of overseers
and professional men subsisting on slave labour. Slave labour was a necessity to
the social and economic system that had gown up in the south; in the north the
presence of slaves was unnecessary and in some respects inconvenient.
Conscientious scruples about slavery were more free, therefore, to develop and
flourish in the northern atmosphere. To this question of the revival of slavery
in the world we must return when we come to consider the perplexities of
American Democracy. Here we note it simply as an added factor in the
heterogeneous mixture of the British Colonies.

But if the inhabitants of the Thirteen Colonies were miscellaneous in their
origins and various in their habits and sympathies, they had three very strong
antagonisms in common. They had a common interest against the Red Indians. For a
time they shared a common dread of French conquest and dominion. And thirdly,
they were all in conflict with the claims of the British crown and the
commercial selfishness of the narrow oligarchy who dominated the British
Parliament and British affairs.

So far as the first danger went, the Indians were a constant evil, but never
more than a threat of disaster. They remained divided against themselves. Yet
they had shown possibilities of combination upon a larger settle. The Five
Nations of the Iroquois (see map, p. 830) was a very important league of tribes.
But it never succeeded in playing off the French against the English to secure
itself, and no Red Indian Jengis Khan ever arose among these nomads of the new
world. The French aggression was a more serious threat. The French never made
settlements in America on a scale to compete with the English, but their
government set about the encirclement of the colonies and their subjugation in a
terrifyingly systematic manner. The English in America were colonists; the
French were explorers, adventurers, agents, missionaries, merchants, and
soldiers. Only in Canada did they strike root. French statesmen sat over maps
and dreamt dreams, and their dreams are to be seen in our map in the chain of
forts creeping southward from the great lakes: and northward up the Mississippi
and Ohio rivers. The struggle of France and Britain was a worldwide struggle. It
was decided in India, in Germany, and on the high seas. In the Peace of Paris
(1763) the French gave England Canada, and relinquished Louisiana to the inert
hands of declining Spain. It was the complete abandonment of America by France.
The lifting of the French danger left the colonists unencumbered to face their
third common antagonist-the crown and government of their motherland.

.. [#fn1] :t:`John Smith’s Travels`.
