
36.3 Civil War is Forced Upon the Colonies
========================================================================
We have noted in the previous chapter how the governing class of Great
Britain steadily acquired the land and destroyed the liberty of the common
people throughout the eighteenth century, and how greedily and blindly the new
industrial revolution was brought about. We have noted also how the British
Parliament, through the decay of the representative methods of the House of
Commons, had become both in its upper and lower houses merely the instrument of
government through the big landowners. Both these big property-holders and the
crown were deeply interested in America; the former as private adventurers, the
latter partly as representing the speculative exploitations of the Stuart kings,
and partly as representing the state in search of funds for the expenses of
foreign policy, and neither lords nor crown were disposed to regard the traders,
planters, and common people of the colonies with any more consideration than
they did the yeomen and small cultivators at home. At bottom the interests of
the common man in Great Britain, Ireland, and America were the same. Each was
being squeezed by the same system. But while in Britain oppressor and oppressed
were closely tangled up in one intimate social system, in America the crown and
the exploiter were far away, and men could get together and develop a sense of
community against their common enemy.

Moreover, the American colonist had the important advantage of possessing a
separate and legal organ of resistance to the British government in the assembly
or legislature of his colony that was necessary for the management of local
affairs. The common man in Britain, cheated out of his proper representation in
the Commons, had no organ, no centre of expression and action for his
discontents.

It will be evident to the reader, bearing in mind the variety of the
colonies, that here was the possibility of an endless series of disputes,
aggressions, and counter-aggressions. The story of the development of
irritations between the colonies and Britain is a story far too intricate,
subtle, and lengthy for the scheme of this Outline. Suffice it that the
grievances fell under three main heads: attempts to secure for British
adventurers or the British government the profits of the exploitation of new
lands; systematic restrictions upon trade designed to keep the foreign trade of
the colonies entirely in British hands, so that the colonial exports all went
through Britain and only British made goods were used in America; and finally
attempts at taxation through the British Parliament as the supreme taxing
authority of the empire. Under the pressure of this triple system of annoyances,
the American colonists were forced to do a very considerable amount of hard
political thinking. Such men as Patrick Henry and James Otis began to discuss
the fundamental ideas of government and political association very much as they
had been discussed in England in the great days of Cromwell's Commonweal. They
began to deny both the divine origin of kingship and the supremacy of the
British Parliament, and (James Otis, 1762) to say such things as:

«God made all men naturally equal.

«Ideas of earthly superiority are educational, not innate.

«Kings were made for the good of the people, and not the people for them.

«No government has a right to make slaves of its subjects.

«Though most governments are *de facto* arbitrary, and consequently the
curse and scandal of human nature, yet none are *de* jure arbitrary».

Some of which propositions reach far.

This ferment in the political ideas of the Americans was started by English
leaven. One very i nfluential English writer was John Locke (1632-1704), whose
Two *Treatises on Civil Government* may be taken, as much as any one single
book can be taken in such cases, as the point of departure for modern democratic
ideas. He was the son of a Cromwellian soldier, he was educated at Christ
Church, Oxford, during the republican ascendancy, he spent some years in Holland
in exile, and his writings form a bridge between the bold political thinking of
those earlier republican days and the revolutionary movement both in America and
France.

But men do not begin to act upon theories. It is always some real danger,
some practical necessity, that produces action; and it is only after action has
destroyed old relationships and produced a new and perplexing state of affairs
that theory comes to its own. Then it is that theory is put to the test. The
discord in interests and ideas between the colonists was brought to a fighting
issue by the obstinate resolve of the British Parliament after the peace of 1763
to impose taxation upon the American colonies. Britain was at peace and flushed
with successes; it seemed an admirable opportunity for settling accounts -with
these recalcitrant settlers. But the great British property owners, found a
power beside their own, of much the same mind with them, but a little divergent
in its ends-the reviving crown. King George III, who had begun his reign in
1760, was resolved to be much more of a king than his two German predecessors.
He could speak English; he claimed to «glory in the name of Briton»-and indeed
it is not a bad name for a man without a perceptible drop of English, Welsh, or
Scotch blood in his veins. In the American colonies and the overseas possessions
generally, with their indefinite charters or no charters at all, it seemed to
him that the crown might claim authority and obtain resources and powers
absolutely denied to it by the strong and jealous aristocracy in Britain. This
inclined many of the Whig noblemen to a sympathy with the colonists that they
might not otherwise have shown. They had no objection to the exploitation of the
colonies in the interests of British «private enterprise», but they had very
strong objections to the strengthening of the crown by that exploitation so as
to make it presently independent of themselves.

The war that broke out was therefore in reality not a war between Britain and
the colonists, it was a war between the, British government and the colonists,
with a body of Whig noblemen and a considerable amount of public feeling in
England on the side of the latter. An early move after 1763 was an attempt to
raise revenue for Britain in the colonies by requiring that newspapers and
documents of various sorts should be stamped. This was stiffly resisted, the
British crown was, intimidated, and the Stamp Acts-were repealed (1766). Their
repeal was greeted by riotous rejoicings in London, more hearty even than those
in the colonies.

But the Stamp Act affair was only one eddy in a turbulent stream flowing
towards civil war. Upon a score of pretexts, and up and down the coast, the
representatives of the British government were busy asserting their authority
and making British government intolerable. The quartering of soldiers upon the
colonists was a great nuisance. Rhode Island was particularly active in defying
the trade restrictions; the Rhode Islanders were «free traders»,-that is to say,
smugglers; a government schooner, the Gaspee, ran aground off Providence; she
was surprised, boarded, and captured by armed men in boats, and burnt. In 1773,
with a total disregard of the existing colonial tea trade, special advantages
for the importation of tea into America were given by the British Parliament to
the East India Company. It was resolved by, the colonists to refuse and boycott
this tea. When the tea importers at Boston showed themselves resolute to land
their cargoes, a band of men disguised as Indians, in the presence of a great
crowd of people, boarded the three tea ships and threw the tea overboard
(December 16th, 1773).

All 1774 was occupied in the gathering up of resources on either side for the
coming conflict. It was decided by the British Parliament in the spring of 1774
to punish Boston by closing her port. Her trade was to be destroyed unless she
accepted that tea. It was a quite typical instance of that silly «firmness»
which shatters empires. In order to enforce this measure, British troops were
concentrated at Boston under General Gage. The colonists took counter-measures.
The first colonial Congress met at Philadelphia in September, at which twelve
colonies were represented: Massachusetts, Connecticut, New Hampshire, Rhode
Island, New York, Now Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland, Delaware, Virginia, and
North and South Carolina. Georgia was not present. True to the best English
traditions, the Congress documented its attitude by a «Declaration of Rights».
Practically this Congress was an insurrectionary government, but no blow was
struck until the spring of 1775. Then came the first shedding of blood.

.. _Figure 837:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0837.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0837.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 837

    Figure 837: Map — Boston, 1775

Two of the American leaders, Hancock and Samuel Adams, had been marked down
by the British Government for arrest and trial for treason; they were known to
be at Lexington, about eleven miles from Boston; and in the night of April 18th,
1775, Gage set his forces in motion for their arrest.

That night was a momentous one in history. The movement of Gage's troops had
been observed, signal lanterns were shown from a church tower in Boston, and two
men, Dawes and Paul Revere, stole away in boats across the Back Bay to take
horse and warn the countryside. The British were also ferried over the water,
and as they marched through the night towards Lexington, the firing of signal
cannon and the ringing of church bells went before them. As they entered
Lexington at dawn, they saw a little company of men drawn up in military
fashion. It seems that the British fired first. There was a single shot and then
a volley, and the little handful decamped, apparently without any answering
shots, leaving eight dead and nine wounded upon the village green.

The British then marched on to Concord, ten miles further, occupied the
village, and stationed a party on the bridge at that place. The expedition had
failed in its purpose of arresting Hancock and Adams, and the British commander
seems to have been at a loss what to do next. Meanwhile the colonial levies were
coming up from all directions, and presently the picket upon the bridge found
itself subjected to an increasing fire from a gathering number of assailants
firing from behind trees and fences. A retreat to Boston was decided upon. It
was a disastrous retreat. The country had risen behind the British; all the
morning the colonials had been gathering. Both sides of the road were now
swarming with sharpshooters firing from behind rock and fence and building; the
soldiers were in conspicuous scarlet uniforms, with yellow facings and white
gaiters and cravats; this must have stood out very vividly against the cold
sharp colours of the late New England spring; the day was bright, hot, and
dusty, and they were already exhausted by a night march. Every few yards a man
fell, wounded or killed. The rest tramped on, or halted to fire an ineffectual
volley. No counter-attack was possible. Their assailants lurked everywhere. At
Lexington there were British reinforcements and, two guns, and after a brief
rest the retreat was resumed in better order. But the sharpshooting and pursuit
was pressed to the river, and after the British had crossed back into Boston,
the colonial levies took up their quarters in Cambridge and prepared to blockade
the city.

