
36.4 The War of Independence
========================================================================
So the war began. It was not a war that promised a conclusive end. The
colonists had no, one vulnerable capital; they were dispersed over a great
country, with a limitless wilderness behind it, and so they had great powers of
resistance. They had learnt their tactics largely from the Indians; they could
fight well in open order, and harry and destroy troops in movement. But they had
no disciplined army that could meet the British in a pitched battle, and little
military equipment; and their levies grew impatient at a long campaign, and
tended to go home to their farms. The British, on the other hand, had a
well-drilled army, and their command of the sea gave them the power of shifting
their attack up and down the long Atlantic seaboard. They were at peace with all
the world. But the king was stupid and greedy to interfere in the conduct of
affairs; the generals he favoured were stupid «strong men» or flighty men of
birth and fashion; and the heart of England was not in the business. He trusted
rather to being able to blockade, raid, and annoy the colonists into submission
than to a conclusive conquest and occupation of the land. But the methods
employed, and particularly the use of hired German troops, who still retained
the cruel traditions of the Thirty Years War, and, of Indian auxiliaries, who
harried the outlying settlers, did not so much weary the Americans of the war as
of the British. The Congress, meeting for the second time in 1775, endorsed the
actions of the New England colonists, and appointed George Washington the
American commander-in-chief. In 1777, General Burgoyne, in an attempt to get
down to New York from Canada, was defeated at Freeman's Farm on the Upper
Hudson, and surrounded and obliged to capitulate at Saratoga with his whole
army. This disaster encouraged the French and Spanish to come into the struggle
on the side of the colonists. The French sent General Lafayette to the State's
to assist them with his advice, and their fleet did much to minimize the
advantage of the British at sea. General Cornwallis was caught in the Yorktown
peninsula in Virginia in 1781, and capitulated with his army. The British
Government, now heavily engaged with France and Spain in Europe, was at the end
of its resources.

At the outset of the war the colonists in general seem to have been as little
disposed to repudiate monarchy and claim complete independence as were the
Hollanders in the opening phase of Philip II's persecutions and follies. The
separatists were called radicals; they were mostly extremely democratic, as we
should say in England today, and their advanced views frightened many of the
steadier and wealthier colonists, for whom class privileges and distinctions had
considerable charm. But early in 1776 an able and persuasive Englishman, Thomas
Paine, published a pamphlet at Philadelphia with the title of *Common
Sense,* which had an enormous effect on public opinion. Its style was
rhetorical by modern standards. «The blood of the slain, the weeping voice of
Nature cries, «Tis time to part,' « and so forth. But its effects were very
great. It converted thousands to the necessity of separation. The turnover of
opinion, once it had begun, was rapid.

Only in the summer of 1776 did Congress take the irrevocable step of
declaring for separation. «The Declaration of Independence», another of those
exemplary documents which it has been the peculiar service of the English to
produce for mankind, was drawn up by Thomas Jefferson; and after various
amendments and modifications it was made the fundamental document of the United
States of America.. There were two noteworthy amendments to Jefferson's draft
-He had denounced the slave trade fiercely, and blamed the home government for
interfering with colonial attempts to end it. This was thrown out, and so, too,
was a sentence about the British: «we must endeavour to forget our former love
for them . . . we might have been a free and a great people together».

Towards the end of 1782, the preliminary articles of the treaty in which
Britain recognized the complete independence of the United States were signed at
Paris. The end of the war was proclaimed on April 19th, 1783, exactly eight
years after Paul Revere's ride, and the retreat of Gage's men from Concord to
Boston. The Treaty of Peace was finally signed at Paris in September.

