
36.5 The Constitution of the United States
========================================================================

.. _Figure 841:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0841.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0841.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 841

    Figure 841: Map — The United States, 1790

From the point of view of human history, the way in which the Thirteen States
became independent is of far less importance than the fact that they did become
independent. And with the establishment of their independence came a new sort of
community into the world. It was like something coming out of an egg. It was a
western European civilization that had broken free from the last traces of
Empire and Christendom; it had not a vestige of monarchy left and no state
religion. It had no dukes, princes, counts, nor any sort of title-bearers
claiming to ascendancy or respect as a right. Even its unity was as yet a mere
unity for defense and freedom. It was in these respects such, a clean start in
political organization as the world had not seen before. The absence of any
binding religious tie is especially noteworthy. It had a number of forms of
Christianity, its spirit was indubitably Christian; but as a state document of
1796 explicitly declared, «The government of the United States is not in any
sense founded on the Christian religion».\ [#fn2]_  The new community had in fact gone
right down to the bare and stripped fundamentals of human association, and it
was building up a new sort of society and a new sort of state upon those
foundations.

Here were about four million people scattered over vast areas with very slow
and difficult means of intercommunication, poor as yet, but with the
potentiality of limitless wealth, setting out to do in reality on a huge scale
such a feat of, construction as the Athenian philosophers twenty-two centuries
before had done in imagination and theory.

This situation marks a definite stage in the release of man from precedent
and usage, and a definite step forward towards the conscious and deliberate
reconstruction of his circumstances to suit his needs and aims. It was a new
method becoming practical in human affairs. The modern states of Europe have
been evolved institution by institution slowly and planlessly out of preceding
things. The United States were planned and made.

In one respect, however, the creative freedom of the new nation was very
seriously restricted. This new sort of community and state was not built upon a
cleared site. It was not even so frankly an artificiality as some of the later
Athenian colonies, which went out from the mother city to plan and build brand
new city-states with brand new constitutions. The thirteen colonies by the end
of the war had all of them constitutions either like that of Connecticut and
Rhode Island dating from their original charters (1662) or, as in the case of
the rest of the states, where a British governor had played a large part in the
administration, re-made during the conflict. But we may well consider these
reconstructions as contributory essays and experiments in the general
constructive effort.

Upon the effort certain ideas stood out very prominently. One is the idea of
political and social equality. This idea, which we saw coming into the world as
an extreme and almost incredible idea in the age between Buddha and Jesus of
Nazareth, is now asserted in the later eighteenth century as a practical
standard of human relationship. Says the fundamental statement of Virginia: «All
men are by nature equally free and independent», and it proceeds to rehearse
their «rights», and to assert that all magistrates and governors are but
«trustees and servants» of the commonweal. All men are equally entitled to the
free exercise of religion. The king by right, the aristocrat, the «natural
slave», the god king, and the god have all vanished from this political scheme
so far as these declarations go. Most of the states produced similar preludes to
government. The Declaration of Independence said that «all men are born equal».
It is everywhere asserted in eighteenth-century terms that the new community is
to be -to use the phraseology we have introduced in an earlier chapter-a
community of will and not a community of obedience. But the thinkers of that
time had a rather clumsier way of putting the thing, they imagined a sort of
individual choice of and assent to citizenship that never in fact occurred-the
so-called Social Contract. The Massachusetts preamble, for instance, asserts
that the state is a voluntary association, «by, which the whole people covenants
with each citizen and each citizen with the whole people that all shall be
governed by certain laws for the common good».

Now it will be evident that most of these fundamental statements are very
questionable statements. Men are not born equal, they are not born free; they
are born a most various multitude enmeshed in an ancient and complex social net.
Nor, is any man invited to sign the social contract or failing that, to depart
into solitude. These statements, literally interpreted, are so manifestly false
that it is impossible to believe that the men who made them intended them to be
literally interpreted. They made them in order to express certain elusive but
profoundly important ideas -ideas that after another century and a half of
thinking the world is in a better position to express. Civilization, as this
outline has shown, arose as a community of obedience, and was essentially a
community of obedience but generation after generation the spirit was abused by
priests and rulers. There was a continual influx of masterful will from the
forests, parklands, and steppes. The human spirit had at last rebelled
altogether against the blind obedience's of the common life; it was seeking -and
at first it was seeking very clumsily- to achieve a new and better sort of
civilization that should also be a community of will. To that end it was
necessary that every man should be treated as the sovereign of himself; his
standing was to be one of fellowship and not of servility. His real use, his,
real importance depended upon his individual quality.

The method by which these creators of political America sought to secure this
community of will was an extremely simple and crude one. They gave what was for
the time, and in view of American conditions, a very wide franchise. Conditions
varied in the different states; the widest franchise was in Pennsylvania, where
every adult male taxpayer voted, but, compared with Britain, all the United
States were well within sight of manhood suffrage by the end of the eighteenth
century. Those makers of America also, made efforts, considerable for their
times, but puny by more modern standards, to secure a widely diffused common
education. The information of the citizens as to what was going on at home and
abroad, they left, apparently without any qualms of misgiving, to public
meetings and the privately owned Printing press.

The story of the various state constitutions, and of the constitution of the
United States its a whole, is a very intricate one, and we can only deal with it
here in the broadest way. The most noteworthy point in a, modern view is the
disregard of women as citizens. The American community was a simple, largely
agricultural community, and most women were married; it seemed natural that they
should be represented by their men folk. But New Jersey admitted a few women to
vote on it property qualification. Another point of great interest is the almost
universal decision to have two governing assemblies, confirming or checking each
other, on the model of the Lords and Commons of Britain. Only Pennsylvania had a
single representative chamber, and that was felt to be a very dangerous and
ultra-democratic state of affairs. Apart from the argument that legislation
should be slow as well as sure, it is difficult to establish any necessity for
this «bi-cameral» arrangement. It seems to have been a fashion with constitution
planners in the eighteenth century rather than a reasonable imperative. The
British division was an old one; the Lords, the original Parliament, was an
assembly of «notables», the leading men of the kingdom; the House of Commons
came in as a new factor, as the elected spokesmen of the burgbers and the small
landed men. It was a little too hastily assumed in the eighteenth century that
the commonalty would be given to wild impulses and would need checking; opinion
was for democracy, but for democracy with powerful brakes always on, whether it
was going up hill or down. About all the upper houses there was therefore a
flavour of select ness; they were elected on a more limited franchise. This idea
of making an upper chamber which shall be a stronghold for the substantial man
does not appeal to modern thinkers so strongly as it did to the men of the
eighteenth century, but the bi-cameral idea in another form still has its
advocates. They suggest that a community may with advantage consider its affairs
from two points of view through the eyes of a body elected to represent trades,
industries, professions, public services, and the like, a body representing
function, and through the eyes of a second body elected by localities to
represent *communities.* For the members, of the former a man would vote by
his calling, for the latter by his district of residence.

They point out that the British House of Lords, is in effect a body
representing function, in which the land, the law, and the church are no doubt
disproportionately represented, but in which industrialism, finance, the great
public services, art, science, and medicine, also find places; and that the
British House of Commons is purely geographical in its reference. It has even
been suggested in Britain that there should the «labour peers», selected from
among the leaders of the great industrial trade unions. But these are
speculations beyond our present scope.

The Central Government of the United States was at first a very feeble body,
a Congress of representatives of the thirteen governments, held together by
certain Articles of Confederation. This Congress was little more than a
conference of sovereign representatives; it had no control, for instance, over
the foreign trade of each state, it could not coin money nor levy taxes by its
own authority. When John Adams, the first minister from the United States to
England, went to discuss a commercial treaty with the British foreign secretary,
he was met by a request for thirteen representatives, one from each of the
states concerned. He had to confess his inadequacy to make binding arrangements.
The British presently began dealing with each state separately over the head of
Congress, and they retained possession of a number of posts in the American
territory about the great lakes because of the inability of Congress to bold
these regions effectually. In another urgent matter Congress proved equally
feeble. To the west of the thirteen states stretched limitless lands into which
settlers were now pushing in ever increasing numbers. Each of the states had
indefinable claims to expansion westward. It was evident to every clear-sighted
man that the jostling of these claims must lead in the long run to war, unless
the Central Government could take on their apportionment. The feebleness of the
Central Government, its lack of concentration, became so much of an
inconvenience and so manifest a danger that there was some secret discussion of
a monarchy, and Nathaniel Gorham of Massachusetts, the president of Congress,
caused Prince Henry of Prussia, the brother of Frederick the Great, to be
approached on the subject. Finally a constitutional convention was called in
1787 at Philadelphia, and there it was that the present constitution of the
United States was in its broad lines hammered out. A great change of spirit had
gone on during the intervening years, a widespread realization of the need of
unity.

When the Articles of Confederation were drawn up, men had thought of the
people of Virginia, the people of Massachusetts, the people of Rhode Island, and
the like; but now there appears a new conception, «the people of the United
States». The new government, with the executive President, the senators,
congressmen, and the Supreme Court, that was now created, was declared to be the
government of «the people of the United States»; it was a synthesis and not a
mere assembly. It said «we the people», and not «we the states», as Lee of
Virginia bitterly complained. It was to be a «federal» and not a confederate
government.

State by state the now constitution was ratified, and in the spring of 1788
the first congress upon the new lines assembled at New York, under the
presidency of George Washington, who had been the national commander-in-chief
throughout the War of Independence. The constitution then underwent considerable
revision, and Washington upon the Potomac was selected as the Federal
capital.


.. _Figure 845:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0845.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0845.png
    :figclass: full-figure
    :width: 600px
    :alt: Figure 845

    Figure 845: The United States of America

    Dates under the names of states show when territories became full States of the Union.


.. [#fn2] The Tripoli Treaty, see Channing, vol iii, chap xviii.
