
36.6 Primitive Features of the United States Constitution
========================================================================
In an earlier chapter we have described the Roman republic, and its mixture
of modern features with dark superstition and primordial savagery, as the
Neanderthal anticipation of the modern democratic state. A time may come when
people will regard the contrivances and. machinery of the American constitution
as the political equivalents of the implements and contrivances of Neolithic
man. They have served their purpose well, and under their protection the people
of the States have grown into one of the greatest, most powerful, and most
civilized communities that the world has yet seen; but there is no reason in
that for regarding the American constitution as a thing more final and
inalterable than the pattern of street railway that overshadows many New York
thoroughfares, or the excellent and homely type of house architecture that still
prevails in Philadelphia. These things also have served a purpose well, they
have their faults, and they can be improved. Our political contrivances, just as
much as our domestic and mechanical contrivances, need to undergo constant
revision as knowledge and understanding grow.

Since the American constitution was planned, our conception of history and
our knowledge of collective psychology has undergone very considerable
development. We are beginning to see many things in the problem of government to
which the men of the eighteenth century were blind; and, courageous as their
constructive disposition was in relation to whatever political creation had gone
before, it fell far short of the boldness which we in these days realize to be
needful if this great human problem of establishing a civilized community of
will in the earth is to be solved. They took many things for granted that now we
know need to be made the subject of the most exacting scientific study and the
most careful adjustment. They thought it was only necessary to set up schools
and colleges, with a grant of land for maintenance, and that they might then be
left to themselves. But education is not a weed that will grow lustily in any
soil, it is a necessary and delicate crop that may easily wilt and degenerate.
We learn nowadays that the underdevelopment of universities and educational
machinery is like some underdevelopment of the brain and nerves, which hampers
the whole growth of the social body. By European standards, by the standard of
any state that has existed hitherto, the level of the common education of
America is high; but by the standard of what it might be, America is an
uneducated country. And those fathers of America thought also that they had but
to leave the press free, find everyone would live in the light. They did not
realize that a free press could develop a sort of constitutional venality due to
its relations with advertisers, and that large newspaper proprietors could
become buccaneers of opinion and insensate wreckers of good beginnings. And,
finally, the makers of America had no knowledge of the complexities of vote
manipulation. The whole science of elections was beyond their ken, they knew
nothing of the need of the transferable vote to prevent the «working» of
elections by specialized organizations, and the crude and rigid methods they
adopted left their political system the certain prey of the great party machines
that have robbed American democracy of half its freedom and most of its
political soul. Politics became a trade, and a very base trade; decent and able
men, after the first great period, drifted out of politics and attended to
«business», and what I have called elsewhere the «sense of the state»\ [#fn3]_ 
declined. Private enterprise ruled in many matters of common concern, because
political corruption made collective enterprise impossible.

.. _Figure 849:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0849.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0849.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 849

    Figure 849: Benjamin Franklin

Yet the defects of the great political system created by the Americans of the
revolutionary period did not appear at once. For several generations the history
of the United States was one of rapid expansion and of an amount of freedom,
homely happiness, and energetic work unparalleled in the world's history. And
the record of America for the whole last century and a half, in spite of many
reversions towards inequality, in spite of much rawness and much blundering, is
nevertheless as bright and honourable a story as that of any other contemporary
people.

In this brief account of the creation of the United States of America we have
been able to do little more than mention the names of some of the group of great
men who made this new departure in human history. We have named casually or we
have not even named such men as Tom, Paine, Benjamin Franklin, Patrick Henry,
Thomas Jefferson, the Adam cousins, Madison, Alexander Hamilton, and George
Washington. It is hard to measure the men of one period of history with those in
another. Some writers, even American writers, impressed by the artificial
splendours of the European courts and by the tawdry and destructive exploits of
a Frederick the Great or a Great Catherine, display a snobbish shame of
something homespun about these makers of America. They feel that Benjamin
Franklin at the court of Louis XVI, with his long hair, his plain clothes, and
his pawky manner, was sadly lacking in aristocratic distinction. But stripped to
their personalities, Louis XVI was hardly gifted enough or noble-minded enough
to be Franklin's valet. If human greatness is a matter of scale and glitter,
then no doubt Alexander the Great is at the apex of human greatness. But is
greatness that? Is not a great man rather one who, in a great position or amidst
great opportunities -and great gifts are no more than great opportunities-
serves God and his fellows with a, humble heart? And quite a number of these
Americans of the revolutionary time do seem to have displayed much
disinterestedness and devotion. They were limited men, fallible men; Washington
was, for example, a conspicuously indolent man; but on the whole they seemed to
have cared more for the commonweal they were creating than for any personal end
or personal vanity.

.. _Figure 850:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0850.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0850.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 850

    Figure 850: George Washington

They were all limited men. They were limited in knowledge and outlook; they
were limited by the limitations of the time. And there was no perfect man among
them. They were, like all of us, men of mixed motives; good impulses arose in
their minds, great ideas swept through them, and also they could be jealous,
lazy, obstinate, greedy, vicious. If one were to write a true, full, and
particular history of the making of the United States, it would have to be
written with charity and high spirits as a splendid comedy. And in no other
regard do we find the rich tortuous humanity of the American story so finely
displayed as in regard to slavery. Slavery, having regard to the general
question of labour, is the test of this new soul in the world's history, the
American soul.

Slavery began very early in the European history of America, and no European
people who went to America can be hold altogether innocent in the matter. At a
time when the German is still the moral whipping-boy of Europe, it is well to
note that the German record is in this respect the best of all. Almost the first
outspoken utterances against negro, slavery came from German settlers in
Pennsylvania. But the German settler was working with free labour upon a
temperate countryside, well north of the plantation zone; he was not under
serious temptation in this matter. American slavery began with the enslavement
of Indians for gang work in mines and upon plantations, and it is curious to
note that it was a very good and humane man indeed, Las Casas, who urged that
negroes should be brought to America to relieve his tormented Indian proteges.
The need for labour upon the plantations of the West Indies and the south was
imperative. When the supply of Indian captives proved inadequate, the planters
turned not only to the negro, but to the jails and poorhouses of Europe for a
supply of toilers. The reader of Defoe's Moll *Flanders* will learn how the
business of Virginian white slavery looked to an intelligent Englishman in the
early eighteenth century. But the negro came very early. The year (1620) that
saw the Pilgrim Fathers landing at Plymouth in New England, saw a Dutch sloop
disembarking the first cargo of negroes at Jamestown in Virginia. Negro slavery
was as old as New England; it had been an American institution for over a
century and a half before the War of Independence. It was to struggle on for the
better part of a century more.

But the conscience of thoughtful men in the colonies was never quite easy
upon this score, and it was one of the accusations of Thomas Jefferson against
the crown and lords of Great Britain that every attempt to ameliorate or
restrain the slave trade on the part of the colonists had been checked by the
great proprietary interests in the mother country.\ [#fn4]_  With the moral and
intellectual ferment of the revolution, the question of negro slavery came right
into the foreground of the public conscience. The contrast and the challenge
glared upon the mind. «All men are by nature free and equal», said the Virginia
Bill of Rights, and outside in the sunshine, under the whip of the overseer,
toiled the negro slave.

It witnesses to the great change in human ideas since the Roman Imperial
system dissolved under the barbarian inrush, that there could be this
heart-searching. Conditions of industry, production, and land tenure had long
prevented any recrudescence of gang slavery; but now the cycle had come round
again, and there were enormous immediate advantages to, be reaped by the owning
and ruling classes in the revival of that ancient institution in mines, upon
plantations, and upon great public works.

It was revived -but against great opposition. From the beginning of the
revival there were protests, and they grew. The revival was counter to the new
conscience of mankind. In some respects the new gang slavery was worse than
anything in the ancient world. Peculiarly horrible was the provocation by the
trade of slave wars and man hunts in Western Africa, and the cruelties of the
long transatlantic voyage. The poor creatures were packed on the ships often
with insufficient provision of food and water, without proper sanitation,
without medicines. Many who could tolerate slavery upon the plantations found
-the slave trade too much for their moral digestions. Three European nations
were chiefly concerned in this dark business, Britain, Spain, and Portugal,
because they were the chief owners of the new lands in America. The comparative
innocence of the other European powers is to be ascribed largely to their lesser
temptations. They were similar communities; in parallel circumstances they would
have behaved similarly.

Throughout the middle part of the eighteenth century there was an active
agitation against negro, slavery in Great Britain as well as in the States. It
was estimated that in 1770 there were fifteen thousand slaves in Britain, mostly
brought over by their owners from the West Indies and Virginia. In 1771 the
issue came to a conclusive test in Britain before Lord Mansfield. A negro named
James Somersett had been brought to England from Virginia by his owner. He ran
away, was captured, and violently taken on a ship to be returned to Virginia.
From the ship he was extracted by a writ of *habeas corpus* lord Mansfield
declared that slavery was a condition -unknown to English law, an «odious»
condition, and Somersett walked out of the court a free man.

The Massachusetts constitution of 1780 had declared that «call men are born
free and equal». A certain negro, Quaco, put this to the test in 1783, and in
that Year the soil of Massachusetts became like the soil of Britain, intolerant
of slavery; to tread upon it was to become free. At that time no other state in
the Union followed this example. At the census of 1790, Massachusetts, alone of
all the states, returned «no slaves».

The state of opinion in Virginia is remarkable, because it brings to light
the peculiar difficulties of the southern states. The great Virginian statesmen,
such as Washington and Jefferson, condemned the institution, yet because there
was no other form of domestic service, Washington owned slaves. There was in
Virginia a strong party in favour of Emancipating slaves, but they demanded that
the emancipated slaves should leave the state within a year or be outlawed! 
They were naturally alarmed at the possibility that a free barbaric black
community, many of its members African-born and reeking with traditions of
cannibalism and secret and dreadful religious rites, should arise beside them
upon Virginian soil. When we consider that point of view, we can understand why
it was that a large number of Virginians should be disposed to retain the mass
of blacks in the country under control as slaves, while at the same time they
were bitterly opposed to the slave trade and the importation of any fresh blood
from Africa. The free blacks, one sees, might easily become a nuisance; indeed
the free state of Massachusetts presently closed its borders to their entry . .
. The question of slavery, which in the ancient world was usually no more than a
question of status between individuals racially akin, merged in America with the
different and profounder question of relationship between two races at opposite
extremes of the human species and of the most contrasted types of tradition and
culture. If the black man had been white, there can be little doubt that negro,
slavery, like white servitude, would have vanished from the United States within
a generation of the Declaration of Independence as a natural consequence of the
statements in that declaration.

.. [#fn3] Wells, :t:`The Future in America`.

.. [#fn4] In 1776 Lord Dartmouth wrote that the colonists could not be allowed "to check or discourage a traffic so beneficent to the nation."

