
36.7 Revolutionary Ideas in France
========================================================================
We have told of the War of Independence in America as the first great break
away from the system of European monarchies and foreign offices, as the
repudiation by a new community of Machiavellian statescraft as the directive
form of human affairs. Within a decade there came a second and much more
portentous revolt against this strange game of Great Powers, this tangled
interaction of courts and policies which obsessed Europe. But this time it was
no breaking away at the outskirts. In France, the nest and home of Grand
Monarchy, the heart and centre of Europe, came this second upheaval. And, unlike
the American colonists, who simply repudiated a king, the French, following in
the footsteps of the English revolution, beheaded one.

Like the British revolution and like the revolution in the United States, the
French revolution can be traced back to the ambitious absurdities of the French
monarchy. The schemes of aggrandizement, the aims and designs of the Grand
Monarch, necessitated an expenditure upon war equipment throughout Europe out of
all proportion to the taxable capacity of the age. And even the splendours of
monarchy were enormously costly, measured by the productivity of the time. In
France, just as in Britain and in America, the first resistance was made not to
the monarch as such and to his foreign policy as such, nor with any clear
recognition of these things as the roots of the trouble, but merely to the
inconveniences and charges upon the individual life caused by them. The
practical taxable capacity of France must have been relatively much less than
that of England because of the various exemptions of the nobility and clergy.
The burthen resting directly upon the common people was heavier. That made the
upper classes the confederates of the court instead of the antagonists of the
court as they were in England, and so prolonged the period of waste further; but
when at last the bursting-point did come, the explosion was more violent and
shattering.

During the years of the American War of Independence there were few signs of
any impending explosion in France. There was much misery among the lower
classes, much criticism and satire, much outspoken liberal thinking, but there
was little to indicate that the thing as a whole, with all its customs, usages,
and familiar discords, might not go on for an indefinite time. It was consuming
beyond its powers of production, but as yet only the inarticulate classes were
feeling the pinch. Gibbon, the historian, knew France well; Paris was as
familiar to him as London; but there is no suspicion to be detected in the
passage we have quoted that days of political and social dissolution were at
hand. No doubt the world abounded in absurdities and injustices, yet
nevertheless, from the point of view of a scholar and a gentleman, it was fairly
comfortable, and it seemed fairly secure.

There was much liberal thought, speech, and sentiment in France at this time.
Parallel with and a little later than John Locke in England, Montesquieu
(1689-1755) in France, in the earlier half, of the eighteenth century, had
subjected social, political, and religious institutions to the same searching
and fundamental analysis, especially in his *Esprit des Lois.* He had
stripped the magical prestige from the absolutist monarchy in France. He shares
with Locke the credit for clearing away many of the false ideas that had
hitherto prevented deliberate and conscious attempts to reconstruct human
society. It was not his fault if at first some extremely unsound and impermanent
shanties were run up on the vacant site. The generation that followed him in the
middle and later decades of the eighteenth century was boldly speculative upon
the moral and intellectual clearings be had made. A group of brilliant writers,
the «Encyclopaedists», mostly rebel spirits from the excellent schools of the
Jesuits, set themselves under the leadership of Diderot to scheme out, in a
group of works; a new world (1766). The glory of the Encylopaedists, says
Mallet, lay «in their hatred of things unjust, in their denunciation of the
trade in slaves, of the inequalities of taxation, of the corruption of justice,
of the wastefulness of wars, in their dreams of social progress, in their
sympathy with the rising empire of industry which was beginning to transform the
world». Their chief error seems to have been an indiscriminate hostility to
religion. They believed that man was naturally just and politically competent,
whereas his impulse to social service and self-forgetfulness is usually
developed only through an education essentially religious, and sustained only in
an atmosphere of honest co-operation. Uncoordinated human initiatives lead to
nothing but social chaos.

Side by side with the Encyclopaedists, were the Economists or Physiocrats,
who were making bold and crude inquiries into the production and distribution of
food and goods. Morally, the author of the *Code de la Nature,* denounced
the institution of private property and proposed a communistic organization of
society. He was the precursor of that large and various school of collectivist
thinkers in the nineteenth century who are lumped together as Socialists.

Both the Encyclopaedists and the various Economists and Physiocrats demanded
a considerable amount of hard thinking in their disciples. An easier and more
popular leader to follow was Rousseau (1712-78). He displayed a curious mingling
of logical rigidity and sentimental enthusiasm. He preached the alluring
doctrine that the primitive state of man was one of virtue and happiness, from
which he had declined through the rather inexplicable activities of priests,
kings, lawyers, and the like. Rousseau's intellectual influence was on the whole
demoralizing. It struck not only at the existing social fabric, but at any
social organization. When he wrote of the Social Contract, he seemed rather to
excuse breaches of the covenant than to emphasize its necessity. Man is so far
from perfect, that a writer who, apparently sustained the thesis that the almost
universal disposition, against which we all have to fortify ourselves, to
repudiate debts, misbehave sexually, and evade the toil and expenses of
education for ourselves and others, is not after all a delinquency, but a fine
display of Natural Virtue, was bound to have a large following in every class
that could read him. Rousseau's tremendous vogue did much to popularize a
sentimental and declamatory method of dealing with social and political
problems.

We have already remarked that hitherto no human community has begun to act
upon theory. There must first be some breakdown and necessity for direction that
lets theory into her own. Up to 1788 the republican and anarchist talk and
writing of French thinkers must have seemed as ineffective and politically
unimportant as the aesthetic socialism of William Morris at the end of the
nineteenth century. There was the social and political system going on with an
effect of invincible persistence, the king hunting and mending his clocks, the
court and the world of fashion pursuing their pleasures, the financiers
conceiving continually more enterprising extensions of credit, business
blundering clumsily along its ancient routes, much incommoded by taxes and
imposts, the peasants worrying, toiling, and suffering, full of a hopeless
hatred of the nobleman's chateau. Men talked and felt they were merely talking.
Anything might be said, because nothing would ever happen.

