
36.8 The Revolution of the Year 1789
========================================================================
The first jar to this sense of the secure continuity of life in France came
in 1787, Louis XVI (1774-92) was a dull, ill-educated monarch, and he had the
misfortune to be married to a silly and extravagant woman, Marie Antoinette, the
sister of the Austrian emperor. The question of her virtue is one of profound
interest to a certain type of historical writer, but we need not discuss it
here. She lived, as Paul Wiriath\ [#fn5]_  puts it, «side by side, but not at the
side» of her husband. She was rather heavy featured influence but not so plain
as to prevent her posing as a beautiful, romantic, and haughty queen. When the
exchequer was exhausted by the war in America (an enterprise to weaken England
of the highest Machiavellian quality), when the whole country was uneasy with
discontents, she set her influence to thwart the attempts at economy of the
king's ministers, to encourage every sort of aristocratic extravagance, and to
restore the church and the nobility to the position they had held in the great
days of Louis XIV. Non-aristocratic officers were to be weeded from the army;
the power of the church over private life was to be extended. She found in an
upper-class official, Calonne, her ideal minister of finance. From 1788-87 this
wonderful man produced money as if by magic-and as if by magic it disappeared
again. Then in 1787 he collapsed, He had piled loan on loan, and now he declared
that the monarchy, the Grand Monarchy that had ruled France since, the days of
Louis XIV, was bankrupt. No more money could be raised. There must be a
gathering of the notables of the kingdom to consider the situation.

To the gathering of notables, a summoned assembly of leading men, Calonne
propounded a scheme for a subsidy to be levied upon all landed property. This
roused the aristocrats to a pitch of great indignation. They demanded the
summoning of a body roughly, equivalent, to the British parliament, the States
General which had not met since 1610. Regardless, of the organ of opinion they
were creating for the discontents below them, excited only by the proposal that
they should bear part of the weight of the financial burdens of the country, the
French notables insisted. And in May, 1789, the States General met.

It was an assembly of the representatives of three orders, the nobles, the
clergy, and the Third Estate, the commons. For the Third Estate the franchise
was very wide, nearly every taxpayer of twenty-five having a vote. (The Parish
Priests voted as clergy, the small noblesse as nobles.) The States General was a
body without any tradition of procedure. Enquiries were sent to the antiquarians
of the Academy of Inscriptions in that matter.

Its opening deliberations turned on the question whether it was to meet as
one body or as three, each estate having an equal vote. Since the Clergy
numbered 308, the Nobles 285, and the Deputies 621, the former arrangement would
put the Commons in an absolute majority, the latter gave them one vote in three.
Nor had the States General any meeting place. Should it meet in Paris or in some
provincial city? Versailles was chosen, «because of the hunting».

It is clear that the king and queen meant to treat this fuss about the
national finance as a terrible bore, and to allow it to interfere with their
social routine as little as possible. We find the meetings going on in salons
that were not wanted, in orangeries and tennis-courts, and so forth.

The question whether the voting was to be by the estates or by head was
clearly a vital one. It was wrangled over for six weeks. The Third Estate,
taking a leaf from the book of the English House of Commons, then declared that
it alone represented the nation, and that no taxation must be levied henceforth
without its consent. Whereupon the king closed the hall in which it was sitting,
and intimated that the deputies had better go home. Instead, the deputies met in
a convenient tennis-court, and there took oath, the Oath of the Tennis Court,
not to separate until they had established a constitution in France.

The king took a high line, and attempted to disperse the Third Estate by
force. The soldiers refused to act. On that the king gave in with a dangerous
suddenness, and accepted the principle that the Three Estates should all
deliberate and vote together as one National Assembly. Meanwhile, apparently at
the queen's instigation, foreign regiments in the French service, who could be
trusted to act against the people, were brought up from the provinces under the
Marshal de Broglie, and the king prepared to go back upon his concessions. Where
upon Paris and France revolted. Broglie hesitated to fire on the crowds. A
provisional city government was set up in Paris and in most of the other large
cities, and a new armed force, the National Guard, a force designed primarily
and plainly to resist the forces of the crown, was brought into existence by
these municipal bodies.

The revolt of July 1789 was really the effective French revolution, The
grim-looking prison of the Bastille, very feebly defended, was stormed by the
people of Paris, and the insurrection spread rapidly throughout France. In the,
east and northwest provinces many chateaux belonging to the nobility were burnt
by the peasants, their title deeds carefully destroyed, and the owners murdered
or driven away. The insurrection spread throughout France. In a month the
ancient and decayed system of the aristocratic order had collapsed. Many of the
leading princes and courtiers of the queen's party fled abroad. The National
Assembly found itself called upon to create a new political and social system
for a new age.

.. [#fn5] Article "France". Encyclopaedia Britannica.
