
36.9 The French Crowned Republic of 1789-1791
========================================================================
The French National Assembly was far less fortunate in the circumstances of
its task than the American Congress. The latter had half a continent to itself,
with no possible antagonist; but the British Government. Its religious and
educational organizations were various, collectively not very powerful, and on
the whole friendly. King George was far away in England, and sinking slowly
towards an imbecile condition. Nevertheless, it took the United States several
years to hammer out a working constitution. The French, on the other hand, were
surrounded by aggressive neighbours, with Machiavellian ideas, they were
encumbered by a king and court resolved to make mischief, and the church was one
single great organization inextricably bound up with the ancient order. The
queen was in close correspondence with the Count of Artois, the Duke of Bourbon,
and the other exiled princes who were trying to induce Austria and Prussia to
attack the new French nation. Moreover, France was already a bankrupt country,
while the United States had limitless undeveloped resources; and the revolution,
by altering the conditions of land tenure and marketing, had produced an
economic disorganization that has no parallel in the case of America.

These were the unavoidable difficulties of the situation. But in addition the
Assembly made difficulties for itself. There was no orderly procedure. The
English House of Commons had had more than five centuries of experience in its
work, and Mirabeau, one of the great leaders of the early Revolution, tried in
vain to have the English rules adopted. But the feeling of the times was all in
favour of outcries, dramatic interruptions, and such-like manifestations of
Natural Virtue. And the disorder did not come merely from the assembly. There
was a great gallery, much too great a gallery, for strangers; but who would
restrain the free citizens from having a voice in the national control? This
gallery swarmed with people eager for a «scene», ready to applaud or shout down
the speakers below. The abler speakers were obliged to, play to the gallery, and
take a sentimental and sensational line. It was easy at a crisis to bring in a
mob to kill debate.

So encumbered, the Assembly set about its constructive task. On the Fourth of
August it achieved a great dramatic success. Led by several of the liberal
nobles, it made a series of resolutions, abolishing serfdom, privileges, tax
exemptions, tithes and feudal courts. (In many parts of the country, however,
these resolutions were not carried into effect until three or four years later.)
Titles went with these other renunciations. Long before France was a republic it
was an offence for a nobleman to sign his name with his title. For six weeks the
Assembly devoted itself, with endless opportunities for rhetoric, to the
formulation of a Declaration of the Rights of Man on the lines of the Bills of
Rights that were the English preliminaries to organized change. Meanwhile the
court plotted for reaction, and the people felt that the court was plotting. The
story is complicated here by the scoundrelly schemes of the king's cousin,
Philip of Orleans, who hoped to use the discords of the time to replace Louis on
the French throne. His gardens at the Palais Royal were thrown open to the
public, and became a great centre of advanced discussion. His agents did much to
intensify the popular suspicion of the king. And things were exacerbated by a
shortage of provisions for which the king's government was held guilty.

Presently the loyal Flanders regiment appeared at Versailles. The royal
family was scheming to get farther away from Paris in order to undo all that had
been done, to restore tyranny and extravagance. Such constitutional monarchists
as General Lafayette were seriously alarmed. And just at this time occurred an
outbreak of popular indignation at the scarcity of f ood that passed by an easy
transition into indignation against the threat of royalist reaction. It was
believed that there was an abundance of provisions at Versailles; that food was
being kept there away from the people. The public mind had been much disturbed
by reports, possibly by exaggerated reports, of a recent banquet at Versailles,
hostile to the nation. Here are some extracts from Carlyle descriptive of that
unfortunate feast.

«The Hall of the Opera is granted; the Salon d'Hercule shall be drawing-room.
Not only the Officers of Flandre, but of the Swiss, of the Hundred Swiss; nay of
the Versailles National Guard, such of them as have any loyalty, shall feast; it
will be a Repast like few.

«And now suppose this Repast, the solid part of it; transacted; and the first
bottle over. Suppose the customary loyal toasts drunk; the King's health, the
Queen's with deafening vivatts; that of the nation 'omitted,' or even
'rejected.' Suppose champagne flowing; with pot-valorous speech, with
instrumental music; empty: featherheads growing ever the noisier, in their own
emptiness, in each other's noise. Her Majesty, who looks unusually sad tonight
(His Majesty sitting dulled with the day's hunting), is told that the sight of
it would cheer her. Behold! She enters there, issuing from her State-rooms, like
the Moon from clouds, this fairest unhappy Queen of Hearts; royal Husband by her
side, young Dauphin in her arms! She descends from the Boxes, amid splendour and
acclaim; walks queen-like round the Tables; gracefully nodding; her looks full
of sorrow, yet, of gratitude and daring, with the hope of France on her mother-
bosom! And now, the band striking up, *0 Richard, 0 mon Roi l'univers
i'abandonne* (Oh Richard, 0 my king, the world is all forsaking thee), could
man do other than rise to height of pity, of loyal valour? Could featherheaded
young ensigns do other than, by white Bourbon Cockades, handed them from fair
fingers; by waving of swords, drawn to pledge the Queen's health; by trampling
of National Cockades; by scaling the Boxes, whence intrusive murmurs may come;
by vociferation, sound, fury and distraction, within doors and without-testify
what tempest-tost state of vacuity they are in?

«A natural Repast; in ordinary times, a harmless one: now fatal . . . Poor
ill-advised Marie Antoinette; with a woman's vehemence, not with a sovereign's
foresight! It was so natural, yet so unwise.' Next day, in public speech 'of
ceremony, her Majesty declares herself 'delighted with Thursday».'

And here to set against this is Carlyle's picture of the mood of the
people.

«In squalid garret, on Monday morning Maternity awakes, to bear children
weeping for bread. Maternity must forth to the streets, to the herb-makers and
bakers'-queues; meets there with hunger-stricken Maternity, sympathetic,
exasperative. 0 we unhappy women! But, instead of bakers'-queues, why not to
Aristocrats' palaces, the root of the matter? Allons! Let us assemble. To the
Hotel-de-Ville; to Versailles . . ».

There was much shouting and coming and going in Paris before this latter idea
realized itself. One Maillard appeared with organizing power, and assumed a
certain leadership. There can be little doubt that the revolutionary leaders,
and particularly General Lafayette, used and organized this outbreak to secure
the king, before he could slip away-as Charles I did to Oxford-to begin a civil
war. As the afternoon wore on, the procession started on its eleven mile
tramp.

Again we quote Carlyle:

«Maillard has halted his draggled Menads on the last hilltop; and now
Versailles, and the Chateau of Versailles, and far and wide the inheritance of
Royalty opens to the wondering eye. From far on the right, over Marly and
Saint-Germainen-Laye; round towards Rambouillet, on the left, beautiful all;
softly embosomed; as if in sadness, in the dim moist weather! And near before us
is Versailles, New and Old; with that broad frondent *Avenue de Versailles*
between-stately frondent, broad, three hundred feet as men reckon, with its four
rows of elms; and then the Chateau de Versailles, ending in royal parks and
pleasances, gleaming lakelets, arbours, labyrinths, the *Menagerie,* and
Great and Little Trianon. High-towered dwellings, leafy pleasant places; where
the gods of this lower world abide: whence, nevertheless, black care cannot be
excluded; whither Menadic hunger is even now advancing, armed with
pike-thyrsi!»

Rain fell as the evening closed.

«Behold the Esplanade, over all its spacious expanse, is covered with groups
of squalid dripping women; of lank-haired male rascality, armed with axes, rusty
pikes, old muskets, iron shod clubs *(batons ferres,* which end in knives
or sword blades, a kind of extempore billhook); looking nothing but hungry
revolt. The rain pours; Gardes-du-Corps so caracoling through the groups 'amid
hisses'; irritating and agitating what is but dispersed here to reunite there .
. .

«Innumerable squalid women beleaguer the President and Deputation; insist on
going with him: has not his Majesty himself, looking from the window, sent out
to ask, What we wanted? 'Bread, and speech with the King,' that was the answer.
Twelve women are clamorously added to the deputation; and march with it, across
the Esplanade; through dissipated groups, caracoling bodyguards and the pouring
rain».

«Bread and not too much talking!» Natural demands.

«One learns also that the royal Carriages are getting yoked, as if for Metz.
Carriages, royal or not, have verily showed themselves at the back gates. They
even produced, or quoted, a written order from our Versailles Municipality—which
is a monarchic not a democratic one. However, Versailles patrols drove them in
again; as the vigilant Lecointre had strictly charged them to do . . .

«So sink the shadows of night, blustering, rainy; and all paths grow dark.
Strangest night ever seen in these regions; perhaps since the Bartholomew Night,
when Versailles, as Bassompierre writes of it, was a *chetif chateau.*

«O for, the lyre of some Orpheus, to constrain, with touch of melodious
strings, these mad masses into Order! For here all seems fallen asunder, in
wide-yawning dislocation. The highest, as in down-rushing of a world, is come in
contact with the lowest: the rascality of France beleaguering the royalty of
France; 'iron- shod batons' lifted round the diadem, not to guard it! With
denunciations of bloodthirsty anti-national body-guards, are heard dark
growlings, against a queenly name.

«The Court sits tremulous, powerless: varies with the varying temper of the
Esplanade, with the varying colour of the rumours from Paris. Thick-coming
rumours; now of peace, now of war. Necker and all the Ministers consult; with a
blank issue. The Oeil-de-Bceuf is one tempest of whispers: We will fly to Metz;
we will not fly. The royal carriages again Attempt egress-though for trial
merely; they are again driven in by Lecointre's patrols».

But we must send the reader to Carlyle to learn of the coming of the National
Guard in the night under General Lafayette himself, the bargaining between the
Assembly and the King, the outbreak of fighting in the morning between the
bodyguard and the hungry besiegers, and how the latter stormed into the palace
and came near to a massacre of the royal family. Lafayette and his troops turned
out in time to prevent that, and timely cartloads of loaves arrive from Paris
for the crowd.

At last it was decided that the king should come to Paris.

«Processional marches not a few our world has seen; Roman triumphs and
ovations, Cabiric cymbal-beatings, Royal progresses, Trish funerals; but this of
the French Monarchy marching to its bed remained to be seen. Miles long, and
have breadth losing itself in vagueness, for all the neighbouring country crowds
to see. Slow: stagnating along, like shoreless Lake, yet with a noise like
Niagara, like Babel and Bedlam. A splashing and a tramping; a hurrahing,
uproaring, musketvolleying; the truest segment of Chaos seen in these latter
Ages! Till slowly it disembogue itself, in the thickening dusk, into expectant
Paris, through a double row of faces all the way from Passy to the
Hôtel-de-Ville.

«Consider this: Vanguard of National troops; with trains of artillery; of
pikemen and pikewomen, mounted on cannons, on carts, hackney-coaches, or on foot
. . . Loaves stuck on the points of bayonets, green boughs stuck in gun-barrels.
Next, as main-march, 'fifty cart-loads of corn,' which have been lent, for
peace, from the stores of Versailles. Behind which follow stragglers of the
Garde-du-Corps; all humiliated, in Grenadier bonnets. Close on these comes the
royal carriage; come royal carriages; for there are a hundred national deputies
too, among whom sits Mirabeau-his, remarks not given. Then finally, pell- mell,
as Tear-guard, Flandre, Swiss, Hundred Swiss, other bodyguards, brigands,
whosoever cannot get before. Between and among all which masses flows without
limit Saint Antoine and the Menadic cohort Menadic, especially about the royal
carriage . . . Covered with tricolor; singing 'allusive songs; pointing with one
hand to the royal carriage, which the allusions bit, and pointing to the
provision-wagons with the other hand, and these words: 'Courage, Friends! We
shall not want bread now; we are bringing you the Baker, the Bakeress and
Baker's boy.'...

«The wet day draggles the tricolor, but the joy is unextinguishable. Is not
all well now? *'Ah Madame. notre bonne Reine,'* said some of these
Strong-women 'some days hence, 'Ah, Madame, our good Queen, don't be a traitor
any more and we will all love you!'..».

This was October the sixth, 1789. For nearly two years the royal family dwelt
unmolested in the Tuileries. Had the court kept common faith with the people,
the king might have died there, a king.

From 1789 to 1791 the early Revolution held its own; France was a limited
monarchy, the king kept a diminished state in the Tuileries, and the National
Assembly ruled a country at peace. The reader who will glance back to the maps
of Poland we have given in the previous chapter will realize what occupied
Russia, Prussia, and Austria at this time. While France experimented with a
crowned republic in the west, the 'last division of the crowned republic of the
east was in progress. France could wait.

When we consider its inexperience the conditions under which it worked, and
the complexities of its problems, one must concede, that the Assembly did a very
remarkable amount of constructive work. Much of that work, was sound and still
endures, much was experimental and has been undone. Some was disastrous. There
was a clearing up of the penal code; torture, arbitrary imprisonment, and
persecutions for heresy were abolished. The ancient provinces of France,
Normandy, Burgundy, and the like gave place to eighty departments. Promotion to
the highest ranks in the army was laid open to men of every class. An excellent
and simple system of law courts was set up, but its value was much vitiated by
having the judges appointed by popular election for, short periods of time. This
made the crowd a sort of final court of appeal, and the judges, like the members
of the Assembly, were forced to play to the gallery. And the whole vast property
of the church was seized and administered by the state; religious establishments
not engaged in education or works of charity were broken up, and the salaries of
the clergy made a charge upon the nation. This in itself was not a bad thing for
the lower clergy in France, who were often scandalously underpaid in comparison
with the richer dignitaries. But in addition the choice of priests and bishops
was made elective, which struck at the very root idea of the Roman church, which
centred everything upon the Pope, and in which all authority is from above
downward. Practically the National Assembly wanted at one blow to make the
church in France. Protestant, in organization if not in doctrine. Everywhere
there were disputes and conflicts between the state priests created by the
National Assembly and the recalcitrant (non-juring) priests who were loyal to
Rome . . .

One curious thing the National Assembly did which greatly weakened its grip
on affairs. It decreed that no member of the Assembly should be an executive
minister. This was in imitation of the American constitution, where also
ministers are separated from the legislature. The British method has been to
have all ministers in the legislative body, ready to answer questions and
account for their interpretation of the laws and their conduct of the nation's
business. If the legislature represents the sovereign people, then it is surely
necessary for the ministers to be in the closest touch with their sovereign.
This severance of the legislature and executive in France caused
misunderstandings and mistrust; the legislature lacked control and the executive
lacked moral force. This led to such an ineffectiveness in the central
government that in many districts at this time, communes find towns were to be
found that were practically self-governing communities; they accepted or
rejected the commands of Paris as they thought fit, declined the payment of
taxes, and divided up the church lands according to their local appetites.

