
17.2 Priests and the Stars
================================================================

.. _Figure 182:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0182.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0182.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 182

    Figure 182: Egyptian Gods — Thoth-Lunus, Hathor, Chemu

We may note here a very interesting fact about the chief temples of Egypt
and, so far as we know — because the ruins are not so distinct — of Babylonia,
and that is that they were "oriented" — that is to say, that the same sort of
temple was built so that the shrine and entrance always faced in the same
direction. In Babylonian temples this was most often duo east, facing the
sunrise on March 21st and September 21st, the equinoxes; and it is to be
noted that it was at the spring equinox that the Euphrates and Tigris came
down in flood. The Pyramids of Giza are also oriented east and west, and the
Sphinx faces due east, but very many of the Egyptian temples to the south of
the delta of the Nile do not point due east, but to the point where the sun
rises at the longest day — and in Egypt the inundation comes close to that
date. Others, however, pointed nearly northward, and others again pointed to
the rising of the star Sirius or to the rising-point of other conspicuous
stars. The fact of orientation links up with the fact that there early arose
a close association between various gods and the sun and various fixed stars.
Whatever the mass of people outside were thinking, the priests of the temples
were beginning to link the movements of those heavenly bodies with the power
in the shrine. They were thinking about the gods they served and thinking new
meanings into them. They were brooding upon the mystery of the stars. It was
very natural for them to suppose that these shining bodies, so irregularly
distributed and circling so solemnly and silently, must be charged with
portents to mankind.

Among other things, this orientation of the temples served to fix and help
the great annual festival of the New Year. On one morning in the year, and
one morning alone, in a temple oriented to the rising-place of the sun at
Midsummer Day, the sun's first rays would smite down through the gloom of the
temple and the long alley of the temple pillars, and light up the god above
the altar and irradiate him with glory. The narrow, darkened structure of the
ancient temples seems to be deliberately planned for such an effect. No doubt
the people were gathered in the darkness before the dawn; in the darkness
there was chanting and perhaps the offering of sacrifices; the god alone
stood mute and invisible. Prayers and invocations would be made. Then upon
the eyes of the worshippers, sensitized by the darkness, as the sun rose
behind them, the god would suddenly shine.

So, at least, one explanation of orientation is found by such students of
orientation as Sir Norman Lockyer.\ [#fn1]_ Not only is orientation apparent in
most of the temples of Egypt, Assyria, Babylonia, and the east, it is found
in the Greek temples; Stonehenge is oriented to the midsummer sunrise, and so
are most of the megalithic circles of Europe; the Altar of Heaven in Peking
is oriented to midwinter. In the days of the Chinese Empire, up to a few
years ago one of the most important of all the duties of the Emperor of China
was to sacrifice and pray in this temple upon midwinter's day for a
propitious year.

The Egyptian priests had mapped out the stars into the constellations, and
divided up the zodiac into twelve signs by 3,000 B.C.

.. [#fn1] In his :t:`Dawn of Astronomy`


