
17.4 Kings Against Priests
================================================================

.. _Figure 186:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0186.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0186.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 186

    Figure 186: An Assyrian King And His Chief Minister

The earliest civilized governments were essentially priestly governments. It
was not kings and captains who first set men to the plough and a settled
life. It was the ideas of the gods and plenty, working with the acquiescence
of common men. The early rulers of Sumer we know were all priests, kings only
because they were chief priests. And priestly government had its own
weaknesses as well as its peculiar deep-rooted strength. The power of a
priesthood is a power over their own people alone. It is a subjugation
through mysterious fears and hopes. The priesthood can gather its people
together for war, but its traditionalism and all its methods unfit it for
military control. Against the enemy without, a priest-led people is feeble.

Moreover, a priest is a man vowed, trained, and consecrated, a man belonging
to a special corps, and necessarily with an intense *esprit de corps.* He has
given up his life to his temple and his god. This is a very excellent thing
for the internal vigour of his own priesthood, his own temple. He lives or
dies for the honour of his particular god. But in the next town or village is
another temple with another god. It is his constant preoccupation to keep his
people from that god. Religious cults and priesthoods are sectarian by
nature; they will convert, they will overcome, but they will never coalesce.
Our first perceptions of events in Sumer, in the dim uncertain light before
history began, is of priests and gods in conflict; until the Sumerians were
conquered by the Semites they were never united; and the same incurable
conflict of priesthoods scars all the temple ruins of Egypt. It was
impossible that it could have been otherwise, having regard to the elements
out of which religion arose.

It was out of those two main weaknesses of all priesthoods, namely, the
incapacity for efficient military leadership and their inevitable jealousy of
all other religious cults, that the power of secular kingship arose. The
foreign enemy either prevailed and set up a king over the people, or the
priesthoods who would not give way to each other set up a common fighting
captain, who retained more or less power in peace time. This secular king
developed a group of officials about him and began, in relation to military
organization, to take a share in the priestly administration of the people's
affairs. So, growing out of priestcraft and beside the priest, the king, the
protagonist of the priest, appears upon the stage of human history, and a
very large amount of the subsequent experiences of mankind is only to be
understood as an elaboration, complication, and distortion of the struggle,
unconscious or deliberate, between these two systems of human control, the
temple and the palace. And it was in the original centres of civilization
that this antagonism was most completely developed. The barbaric Aryan
peoples, who became ultimately the masters of all the ancient civilizations
of the Orient and of the western world, never passed through a phase of
temple rule on their way to civilization; they came to civilization late;
they found that drama already half-played. They took over the ideas of both
temple and kingship, when those ideas were already elaborately developed,
from the more civilized Hamitic or Semitic people they conquered.

The greater importance of the gods and the priests in the earlier history of
the Mesopotamian civilization is very apparent, but gradually the palace won
its way until it was at last in a position to struggle definitely for the
supreme power. At first, in the story, the palace is ignorant and friendless
in the face of the temple; the priests alone read, the priests alone know the
people are afraid of them. But in the dissensions of the various cults comes
the opportunity of the palace. From other cities, from among captives, from
defeated or suppressed religious cults, the palace gets men who also can read
and who can do magic things.\ [#fn2]_ The court also becomes a centre of writing
and record; the king thinks for himself and becomes politic. Traders and
foreigners drift to the court, and if the king has not the full records and
the finished scholarship of the priests, he has a wider and fresher first-
hand knowledge of many things. The priest comes into the temple when he is
very young; he passes many years as a neophyte; the path of learning the
clumsy letters of primitive times is slow and toilsome; he becomes erudite
and prejudiced rather than a man of the world. Some of the more active-minded
young priests may even cast envious eyes at the king's service. There are
many complications and variations in this ages-long drama of the struggle
going on beneath the outward conflicts of priest and king, between the made
man and the born man, between learning and originality, between established
knowledge and settled usage on the one hand, and creative will and
imagination on the other. It is not always, as we shall find later, the
priest who is the conservative and unimaginative antagonist. Sometimes a king
struggles against narrow and obstructive priesthoods; sometimes priesthoods
uphold the standards of civilization against savage, egotistical, or
reactionary kings.

One or two outstanding facts and incidents of the early stages of this
fundamental struggle in political affairs are all that we can note here
between 4,000 B.C. and the days of Alexander.

.. [#fn2] Cp. Moses and the Egyptian Magicians.
