
17.5 How Bel-Marduk Struggled Against the Kings
================================================================

.. _Figure 190:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0190.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0190.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 190

    Figure 190: Pharaoh Chephren

In the early days of Sumeria and Akkadia the city-kings were priests and
medicine-men rather than kings, and it was only when foreign conquerors
sought to establish their hold in relation to existing institutions that the
distinction of priest and king became definite. But the god of the priests
remained as the real overlord of the land and of priest and king alike. He
was the universal landlord; the wealth and authority of his temples and
establishments outshone those of the king. Especially was this the case
within the city walls. :doc:`Hammurabi <../140-the-first-civilizations/1423-early-civilizations-the-empire-of-hammurabi>`, the founder of the first Babylonian
empire, is one of the earlier monarchs whom we find taking a firm grip upon
the affairs of the community. He does it with the utmost politeness to the
gods. In an inscription recording his irrigation work in Sumeria and Akkadia,
he begins: "When Anu and Bel entrusted me with the rule of Sumer and Akkad—."
We possess a code of laws made by this same Hammurabi — it is the earliest
known code of law — and at the head of this code we see the figure of
Hammurabi receiving the law from its nominal promulgator, the god Shamash.

An act of great political importance in the conquest of any city was the
carrying off of its god to become a subordinate in the temple of its
conqueror. This was far more important than the subjugation of king by king.
Merodach, the Babylonian Jupiter, was carried off by the Elamites, and
Babylon did not feel independent until its return. But sometimes a conqueror
was afraid of the god he had conquered. In the collection of letters
addressed to Amenophis III and IV at Tel-Amarna in Egypt, to which allusion
has already been made, is one from a certain king, Tushratta, King of
Mitanni, who has conquered Assyria, and taken the statue of the goddess
Ishtar. Apparently he has sent this statue into Egypt, partly to acknowledge
the overlordship, of Amenophis, but partly because he fears her anger.
(Winckler.) In the Bible is related (Sam. i. v. 1) how the Ark of the
Covenant of the God of the Hebrews was carried off by the Philistines, as a
token of conquest, into the temple of the fish god, Dagon, at Ashdod, and how
Dagon fell down and was broken, and how the people of Ashdod were smitten
with disease. In the latter story particularly, the gods and priests fill the
scene; there is no king in evidence at all.

Right through the history of the Babylonian and Assyrian empires no monarch
seems to have felt his tenure of power secure in Babylon until he had ?taken
the hand of Bel??that is to say, that he had been adopted by the priesthood
of ?Bel? as the god's son and representative. As our knowledge of Assyrian
and Babylonian history grows clearer, it becomes plainer that the politics of
that world, the revolutions, usurpations, changes of dynasty, intrigues with
foreign powers, turned largely upon issues between the great wealthy
priesthoods and the growing but still inadequate power of the monarchy. The
king relied on his army, and this was usually a mercenary army of foreigners,
speedily mutinous if there was no pay or plunder, and easily bribed. We have
already noted the name of Sennacherib, the son of Sargon II, among the
monarchs of the Assyrian empire. Sennacherib was involved in a violent
quarrel with the priesthood of Babylon; he never ?took the hand of Bel?; and
finally struck at that power by destroying altogether the holy part of the
city of Babylon (691 B.C.) and removing the statue of Bel-Marduk to Assyria.
He was assassinated by one of his sons, and his successor, Esar-haddon (his
son, but not the son who was his assassin), found it expedient to restore
Bel-Marduk and rebuild his temple, and make his peace with the god.

`Assurbanipal`_ (Greek, Sardanapalus), the son of this Esar-haddon, is a
particularly interesting figure from this point of view of the relationship
of priesthood and king. His father's reconciliation with the priests of Bel-
Marduk went so far that Sardanapalus was given a Babylonian instead of a
military Assyrian education. He became a great collector of the clay
documents of the past, and his library, which has been unearthed, is now the
most precious source of historical material in the world. But for all his
learning he kept his grip on the Assyrian army; he made a temporary conquest
of Egypt, suppressed a rebellion in Babylon, and carried out a number of
successful expeditions. As we have already told in :doc:`Chapter 14 <../140-the-first-civilizations/1424-early-civilizations-the-assyrian-empire>`, he was
almost the last of the Assyrian monarchs. The Aryan tribes, who knew more of
war than of priestcraft, and particularly the Scythians, the Medes and
Persians, had long been pressing upon Assyria, from the north and north-east.
The Medes and Persians formed an alliance with the nomadic Semitic Chaldeans
of the south for the joint undoing of Assyria. Nineveh, the Assyrian capital,
fell to these Aryans in 606 B.C.

.. _Assurbanipal: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ashurbanipal

Sixty-seven years after the taking of Nineveh by the Aryans, which left
Babylonia to the Semitic Chaldeans, the last monarch of the
:doc:`Chaldean Empire <../140-the-first-civilizations/1425-early-civilizations-the-chaldean-empire>`
(the Second Babylonian Empire), `Nabonidus`_, the father of
Belshazzar, was overthrown by `Cyrus`_, the Persian. This Nabonidus, again,
was a highly educated monarch, who brought far too much intelligence and
imagination and not enough of the short-range wisdom of this world to affairs
of state. He conducted antiquarian researches, and to his researches it is
that we owe the date of 3,750 B.C., assigned to Sargon I and still accepted
by many authorities. He was proud of this determination, and left
inscriptions to record it. It is clear he was a religious innovator; he built
and rearranged temples and attempted to centralize religion in Babylon by
bringing a number of local gods to the temple of Bel-Marduk. No doubt he
realized the weakness and disunion of his empire due to these conflicting
cults, and had some conception of unification in his mind.

.. _Nabonidus: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nabonidus
.. _Cyrus: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyrus_the_Great

Events were marching too rapidly for any such development. His innovation had
manifestly raised the suspicion and hostility of the priesthood of Bel. They
sided with the Persians. "The soldiers of Cyrus entered Babylon without
fighting"". Nabonidus was taken prisoner, and Persian sentinels were set at
the gates of the temple of Bel, "where the services continued without
intermission".

Cyrus did, in fact, set up the Persian Empire in Babylon with the blessing of
Bel-Marduk. He gratified the conservative instincts of the priests by packing
off the local gods back to their ancestral temples. He also restored the Jews
to Jerusalem.\ [#fn3]_ These were merely matters of immediate policy to him. But
in bringing in the irreligious Aryans, the ancient Priesthood was paying too
highly for the continuation of its temple services. It would have been wiser
to have dealt with the innovations of Nabonidus, that earnest heretic, to
have listened to his ideas, and to have met the needs of a changing world.
Cyrus entered Babylon 539 B.C.; by 521 B.C. Babylon was in insurrection
again, and in 520 B.C. another Persian monarch, Darius, was pulling down her
walls. Within two hundred years the life had altogether gone out of those
venerable rituals of Bel-Marduk, and the temple of Bel-Marduk was being used
by builders as a quarry.

.. [#fn3] See the last two verses of the Second Book of Chronicles, and Ezra, ch. i.

