
17.7 Shi Hwang-ti Destroys the Books
================================================================
The struggle of priest and king in China cannot be discussed here at any
length. It was different again, as in Egypt it was different from Babylonia,
but we find the same effort on the part of the ruler to break up tradition
because it divides up the people. The Chinese Emperor, the ?Son of Heaven?,
was himself a high-priest, and his chief duty was sacrificial; in the more
disorderly phases of Chinese history he ceases to rule and continues only to
sacrifice. The literary class was detached from the priestly class at an
early date. It became a bureaucratic body serving the local kings and rulers.
That is a fundamental difference between the history of China and any Western
history. While Alexander was overrunning Western Asia, China, under the last
priest-emperors of the Chow Dynasty, was sinking into a state of great
disorder. Each province clung to its separate nationality and traditions, and
the Huns spread from province to province. The King of T'sin (who lived about
eighty years after Alexander the Great), impressed by the mischief tradition
was doing in the land, resolved to destroy the entire Chinese literature, and
his son, Shi Hwang-ti, the "first universal Emperor", made a strenuous
attempt to seek out and destroy all the existing classics. They vanished
while he ruled, and he ruled without tradition, and welded China into a unity
that endured for some centuries; but when he had passed, the hidden books
crept out again. China remained united, though not under his descendants, but
after a civil war under a fresh dynasty, the Han Dynasty (206 B.C.). The
first Han monarch did not sustain this campaign of Shi Hwang-ti against the
*literati*, and his successor made his peace with them and restored the texts
of the classics.
