30.1 Justinian the Great
========================================================================
In the preceding two chapters we have concentrated our
attention chiefly on the collapse in the comparatively short space of four
centuries of the political and social order of the western part of the great
Roman Empire of Caesar and Trajan. We have dwelt upon the completeness of that
collapse. To any intelligent and public-spirited mind living in the time and
under the circumstances of St. Benedict or Cassiodorus, it must have seemed,
indeed, as if the light of civilization was waning and near extinction. But
with the longer views a study of universal history gives us, we can view those
centuries of shadow as a phase, and probably a necessary phase, in the onward
march of social and political ideas and understandings. And if, during that
time, a dark sense of calamity rested upon Western Europe, we must remember
that over large portions of the world there was no retrogression.

With their Western prepossessions European writers are much
too prone to underrate the tenacity of the Eastern Empire that centered upon
Constantinople. This empire embodied a tradition much more ancient than that of
Rome. If the reader will look at the map we have given of its extent in the
sixth century, and if he will reflect that its official language had then
become Greek, he will realize that what we are dealing with here is only
nominally a branch of the Roman Empire; it is really the Hellenic Empire of
which Herodotus dreamt and which Alexander the Great founded. True it called
itself Roman and its people «Romans», to this day modern Greek is called
«Romaic». True also that Constantine the Great knew no Greek and that
Justinian's accent was bad. These superficialities of name and form cannot
alter the fact that the empire was in reality. Hellenic, with a past of' six
centuries at the time of Constantine the Great and that while the real Roman
Empire crumpled up completely in four centuries, this Hellenic «Roman-Empire»
held out for more than eleven from 312, the beginning of the reign of
Constantine the Great, to 1453, when Constantinople fell to the Ottoman Turks.

And while we have had to tell of something like a complete
social collapse in the west, there were no such equivalent breakdowns in the
east. Towns and cities flourished, the countryside was well cultivated, trade
went on. For many centuries Constantinople was the greatest and richest city in
the world. We will not trouble ourselves here with the names and follies, the
crimes and intrigues, of its tale of emperors. As with most monarchs of great
states, they did not guide their empire; they were carried by it. We have
already dealt at some length with, Constantine the Great (312-337), we have
mentioned Theodosius the Great (379-395), who for a little while reunited the
empire, and Justinian I (527-565), Presently we shall tell something of
Heraclitus (610-641). Justinian, like Constantine, may have had Slav blood in
his veins. He was a man of great ambition and great organizing power, and he
had the good fortune to be married to a woman of equal or greater ability, the
Empress Theodora, who had in her youth been an actress of doubtful reputation.
But his ambitious attempts to restore the ancient greatness of the empire
probably overtaxed its resources. As we have told, he reconquered, the African
province from the Vandals and most of Italy from the Goths. He so recovered the
South Spain. He built the great and beautiful church of Sancta Sophia in
Constantinople, founded a university, and codified the law.\ [#fn1]_  But against
this we must set his closing of the schools of Athens. Meanwhile a great plague
swept the world and at his death this renewed and expanded empire of his
collapsed like a pricked bladder. The greater part of his Italian conquests was
lost to the Lombards. Italy was indeed at that time almost a desert; the
Lombard historians assert they came into an empty country. The Avars and Slavs
struck down from the Danube country towards the Adriatic, Slav populations
establishing themselves in what is now Serbia, Croatia, and Dalmatia, to become
the Yugo-Slavs of today. Moreover, a great and exhausting struggle began with
the Sassanid Empire in Persia.

But before we say anything of this struggle, in which the
Persians thrice came near to taking Constantinople, and which was decided by a
great Persian defeat at Nineveh (627), it is necessary to of Persia from .the
Parthian days.

.. [#fn1] Great importance is attached to this task by historians, including one of the editors of this history. We are told that the essential contribution of Rome to the inheritance of mankind is the idea of society founded on law and that this exploit of Justinian was the crown of the gift. The writer is ill-equipped to estimate the peculiar value of Roman legalism to mankind. Existing law seems to him to be based upon a confused foundation of conventions arbitrary assumptions, and working fictions about human relationship, and to be a very impracticable and antiquated system indeed; he is persuaded that a time will come when the whole theory and practice of law will be recast in the light of a well-developed science of social psychology in accordance with a scientific conception of human society as one developing organization and in definite relationship to a system of moral and intellectual education. He contemplates the laws and lawyers of today with a temperamental lack of appreciation. This may have made him negligent of Justinian and unjust to Rome as a whole.
