
30.7 The Great Age of China
========================================================================

.. _Figure 552:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0552.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0552.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 552

    Figure 552: Map — Chinese Empire, Tang Dynasty

    The Chinese Empire under the Tang dynasty, at its greatest extent. Superimposed: the Roman Empire at its greatest extent, under Trajan.

These seven centuries which saw the beginning and the end
of the emperors in Rome and the complete breakdown and recasting of the social,
economic, political, and religious life of Western Europe, saw also very
profound changes in the Chinese world. It is too commonly assumed by both
Chinese, Japanese, and European historians, that the Han dynasty, under which
we find China at the beginning of this period, and the Tang dynasty, with which
it closed, were analogous ascendancies controlling a practically similar
empire, and that the four centuries of division that elapsed between the end of
the Han dynasty (220) and the beginning of the Tang period (619) were centuries
of disturbance rather than essential change. The divisions of China are
supposed to be merely political and territorial; and, deceived by the fact that
at the close as at the commencement of these four centuries, China occupied
much the same wide extent of Asia, and was still recognizably China, still with
a common culture, a common script, and a common body of ideas, they ignore the
very fundamental breaking down and reconstruction that went on, and the many
parallelisms to the European experience that China displayed.

It is true that the social collapse was never so complete
in the Chinese as in the European world. There remained throughout the whole
period considerable areas in which the elaboration of the arts of life could go
on. There was no such complete deterioration in cleanliness, decoration,
artistic and literary production as we have to record in the West, and no such
abandonment of any search for grace and pleasure. We note, for instance, that
«tea» appeared in the world, and its use spread throughout China. China began
to drink tea in the sixth century A.D. And there were Chinese poets to write
delightfully about the effects of the first cup and the second cup and the
third cup, and so on. China continued to produce beautiful paintings long after
the fall of the Han rule. In the second, third, and fourth centuries some of
the most lovely landscapes were painted that have ever been done by men. A
considerable production of beautiful vases and carvings also continued. Fine
building and decoration went on. Printing from wood blocks began about the same
time as tea drinking, and with the seventh century came a remarkable revival of
poetry.

Certain differences between the great empires of the East
and West were all in favour of the stability of the former. China had no
general coinage. The cash and credit system of the Western world, at once
efficient and dangerous, had not strained her economic life. Not that the
monetary idea was, unknown. For small transactions the various provinces, were
using perforated zinc and brass «cash», but for larger there was nothing but
stamped ingots of silver. This great empire was still carrying on most of its
business and a basis of barter like that which prevailed in Babylon in the days
of the Aramean merchants. And so it continued to do to the dawn of the
twentieth century.

We have seen how under the Roman republic economic and social
order was destroyed by the too great fluidity of property that money brought
about. Money became abstract, and lost touch with the real values it was
supposed to represent. Individuals and communities got preposterously into
debt, and the world was saddled by a class of rich men who were creditors, men
who did not handle and administer any real wealth, but who had the power to
call up money. No such development of «finance» occurred in China. Wealth in
China remained real and visible. And China had no need for any Licinian law,
nor for a Tiberius Gracchus. The idea of property in China did not extend far
beyond tangible things. There was no «labour» slavery, no gang servitude.\ [#fn4]_ 

The occupier and user of the land was in most instances
practically the owner of it, subject to a land tax. There was a certain amount
of small scale landlordism, but no great estates. Landless men worked for wages
paid mostly in kind–as they were in ancient Babylon.

These things made for stability and the geographical form
of China for unity; nevertheless, the vigour of the Han dynasty declined, and
when at last at the close of the second century A.D. the world catastrophe of
the great pestilence struck the system the same pestilence that inaugurated a
century of confusion in the Roman empire, the dynasty fell like a rotten tree
before a gale.

And the same tendency to break up into a number of warring
states, and the same eruption of barbaric rulers, was displayed in East and
West alike. In China, as in the Western empire, faith had decayed. Mr. Fu
ascribes much of the political nervelessness of China in this period to
Epicureanism, arising, he thinks, out of the sceptical individualism of Lao
Tse. This phase of division is known as the «Three Kingdom Period». The fourth
century saw a dynasty of more or less civilized Hung established as rulers in
the province of Shen-si. This Hunnish kingdom included not merely the north of
China, but great areas of Siberia; its dynasty absorbed the Chinese
civilization, and its influence carried Chinese trade and knowledge to the
Arctic Circle. Mr. Fu compares this Siberian monarchy to the empire of
Charlemagne in Europe; it was the barbarian becoming «Chinized» as Charlemagne
was a barbarian becoming Romanized. Out of a fusion of these Siberian with
native north Chinese elements arose the Suy dynasty, which conquered the south.
This Suy dynasty marks the beginning of a renascence of China. Under a Suy
monarch the Lu-chu isles were annexed to China, and there was a phase of great
literary activity. The number of volumes at this time in the imperial library
was increased, we are told, to 54,000. The dawn of the seventh century saw the
beginning of the great Tang dynasty, which was to endure for three centuries.

The renascence of China that began with Suy and culminated
in Tang was, Mr. Fu insists, a real new birth. «The spirit», he writes, «was a
new one; it marked the Tang civilization with entirely distinctive features.
Four main factors had been brought together and fused: (1) Chinese liberal culture;
(2) Chinese classicism; (3) Indian Buddhism; and (4) Northern bravery. A new
China had come into being. The provincial system, the central administration,
and the military organization of the Tang dynasty were quite different from
those of their predecessors. The arts had been much influenced and revivified
by Indian and Central Asiatic influences. The literature was no mere
continuation of the old; it was a now production. The religious and
philosophical schools of Buddhism were fresh features. It was a period of
substantial change.

«It may be interesting to compare this making of China with
the fate of the Roman Empire in her later days. As the Roman world was divided
into the eastern and western halves, so was the Chinese world into the southern
and the northern. The barbarians in the case of Rome and in the case of China
made similar invasions. They established dominions of a similar sort.
Charlemagne's empire corresponded to that of the Siberian dynasty (Later Wei),
the temporary recovery of the Western empire by Justinian corresponded to the
temporary recovery of the north by Liu Yu. The Byzantine line corresponded to
the southern dynasties. But from this point the two worlds diverged. China
recovered her unity; Europe has still to do so».

The dominions of the emperor, Tai-tsung (627), the second
Tang monarch, extended southward into Annam and westward to the Caspian Sea.
His southern frontier in that direction marched with that of Persia. His
northern ran along the Altai from the Kirghis steppe, north of the desert of
Gobi. But it did not include Korea, which was conquered and made tributary by
his son. This Tang dynasty civilized and incorporated into the Chinese race the
whole of the southward population, and just as the Chinese of the north call themselves
the «men of Han», so the Chinese of the south call themselves the «men of
Tang». The law was codified, the literary examination system was revised, and a
complete and accurate edition of all the Chinese classics was produced. To, the
court of Tai-tsung came an embassy from Byzantium, and, what is more
significant, from Persia came a company of Nestorian missionaries (635). These
latter Tai-tsung received with great respect; he heard them state the chief
articles of their creed, and ordered the Christian scriptures to be translated
into Chinese for his further examination. In 638 he announced that he found the
new religion entirely satisfactory, and that it might be preached within the
empire. He also allowed the building of a church and the foundation of a
monastery.

A still more remarkable embassy also came to the court of
Tai-tsung in the year 628, five years earlier than the Nestorians. This was a
party of Arabs, who came by sea to Canton in a trading vessel from Yanbu, the
port of Medina in Arabia. (Incidentally it is interesting to know that there
were such vessels engaged in an east and west trade at this time.) These Arabs
had been sent by that Muhammad we have already mentioned, who styled himself
«The Prophet of God», and the message they brought to Tai-tsung was probably
identical with the summons which was sent in the same year to the Byzantine
emperor Heraclius and to Kavadh in Ctesiphon. But the Chinese monarch neither
neglected the message as Heraclius did, nor insulted the envoys after the
fashion of the parricide Kavadh. He received them well, expressed great
interest in their theological views, and assisted them, it is said, to build a
mosque for the Arab traders in Canton–a mosque which survives to this day. It
is one of the oldest mosques in the world.

.. [#fn4] There were girl slaves who did domestic work and women who were bought and sold. —J. J. L. D.
