
30.8 Intellectual Fetters of China
========================================================================
The urbanity, the culture, and the power of China under the
early Tang rulers are in so vivid a contrast with the decay, disorder, and
divisions of the Western world, as at once to raise some of the most
interesting questions in the history of civilization. Why did not China keep
this great lead she had won by her rapid return to unity and order? Why does
she not to this day dominate the world culturally and politically?

For a long time she certainly did keep ahead. It is only a
thousand years later, in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, with the
discovery of America, the spread of printed books and education in the West,
and the dawn of modern scientific discovery, that we can say with confidence
that the Western world began to pull ahead of China. Under the Tang rule, her
greatest period, and then again under the artistic but rather decadent Sung
dynasty (960-1279), and again during the period of the cultured Mings,
(1358-1644), China presented a spectacle of prosperity, happiness, and artistic
activity far in front of any contemporary state. And seeing that she achieved
so much, why did she not achieve more? Chinese shipping was upon the seas, and
there was a considerable overseas trade during that time.\ [#fn5]_  Why did the
Chinese never discover America, or Australia? There was much isolated
observation, ingenuity, and invention. The Chinese knew of gunpowder in the
sixth century, they used coal and gas heating centuries before these things
were used in Europe; their bridge-building, their hydraulic engineering was
admirable; the knowledge of materials shown in their enamel and lacquer ware is
very great. Why did they never organize the system of record and co-operation
in inquiry that has given the world modern science? And why, in spite of their
general training in good manners and self-restraint, did intellectual education
never soak down into the general mass of the population? Why are the masses of
China today, and why have they always been, in spite of an exceptionally high
level of natural intelligence, illiterate?

It is customary to meet such questions with rather
platitudinous answers. We are told that the Chinaman is the most conservative
of human beings, that, in contrast with the European races, his mind is twisted
round towards the past, that he is the willing slave of etiquette and precedent
to a degree inconceivable to Western minds. He is represented as having a
mentality so distinct that one might almost expect to find a difference in brain
structure to explain it. The appeals of Confucius to the wisdom of the ancients
are always quoted to clinch this suggestion.

If, however, we examine this generalization more closely,
it dissolves into thin air. The superior intellectual initiative, the liberal
enterprise, the experimental disposition that is supposed to characterize the
Western mind, is manifest in the history of that mind only during certain
phases and under exceptional circumstances. For the rest, the Western world
displays itself as traditional and conservative as China. And, on the other
hand, the Chinese mind has, under conditions of stimulus, shown itself quite as
inventive and versatile as the European, and the very kindred Japanese mind
even more so. For, take the case of the Greeks, the whole swing of their mental
vigour falls into the period between the sixth century B.C. and the decay of
the Alexandrian Museum under the later Ptolemies in the second century B.C.
There were Greeks before that time and Greeks since, but a history of a
thousand years of the Byzantine Empire showed the Hellenic world at least as
intellectually stagnant as China. Then we have already drawn attention the
comparative sterility of the Italian mind during the Roman period and its
abundant fertility since the Renaissance of learning The English mind again had
a phase of brightness in the seventh and eighth centuries, and it did not shine
again until the fifteenth. Again, the mind of the Arabs, as we shall presently
tell, blazed out like a star for half a dozen generations after the appearance
of Islam, having never achieved anything of importance before or since. On the
other hand, there was always a great deal of scattered inventiveness in China,
and the progress of Chinese art witnesses to new movements and vigorous
innovations. We exaggerate the reverence of the Chinese for their fathers;
parricide was a far commoner crime among the Chinese emperors than it was even
among the rulers of Persia. Moreover, there have been several liberalizing
movements in China, several recorded struggles against the «ancient ways».

It has already been suggested that phases of real
intellectual progress in any community seem to be connected with the existence
of a detached class of men, sufficiently free not to be obliged to toil or
worry exhaustively about mundane needs, and not rich and powerful enough to be
tempted into extravagances of lust, display, or cruelty. They must have a sense
of security, but not a conceit of superiority. This class, we have further
insinuated, must be able to talk freely and communicate easily. It must not be
watched for heresy or persecuted for any ideas it may express. Such a happy
state of affairs certainly prevailed in Greece during its best days. A class of
intelligent, free gentlefolk is indeed evident in history whenever there is a
record of bold philosophy or effective scientific advances.

In the days of Tang and Sung and Ming there must have been
an abundance of pleasantly circumstanced people in China of just the class that
supplied most of the young men of the Academy at Athens, or the bright
intelligences of Renaissance Italy, or the members of the London Royal Society,
that mother society of modern science; and yet China did not produce in these
periods of opportunity any such large beginnings of recorded and analyzed fact,

If we reject the idea that there is some profound racial
difference between China and the West which makes the Chinese by nature
conservative and the West by nature progressive, then we are forced to look for
the operating cause of this difference in progressiveness in some other
direction. Many people are disposed to find that operating cause which has, in
spite of her original advantages, retarded China so greatly during the last
four or five centuries, in the imprisonment of the Chinese mind in a script and
in an idiom of thought so elaborate and so difficult that the mental energy of
the country has been largely consumed in acquiring it. This view deserves
examination.

We have already given an account in Chap. XVI of the
peculiarities of Chinese writing and of the Chinese language. The Japanese
writing is derived from the Chinese, and consists of a more rapidly written
system of forms. A great number of these forms are ideograms taken over from
the Chinese, and used exactly as the Chinese ideograms are used, but also a
number of signs are used to express syllables; there is a Japanese syllabary
after the fashion of the Sumerian syllabary we have described in Chap. XVI. The
Japanese writing remains a clumsy system, as clumsy as cuneiform, though not so
clumsy as Chinese; and there has been a movement in Japan to adopt a Western
alphabet. Korea long ago went a step farther and developed a true alphabet from
the same Chinese origins. With these exceptions all the great writing systems
now in use in the world are based on the Mediterranean alphabets, and are
beyond comparison more easily learnt and mastered than the Chinese. This means
that while other peoples learn merely a comparatively simple and
straightforward method of setting down the language with which they are
familiar, the Chinaman has to master a great multitude of complex word signs
and word groups. He must not simply learn the signs, but the established
grouping of those signs to represent various meanings. He must familiarize
himself, therefore, with a number of exemplary classical works. Consequently in
China, while you will find great numbers of people who know the significance of
certain frequent and familiar characters, you discover only a few whose knowledge
is sufficiently extensive to grasp the meaning of a newspaper paragraph, and
still fewer who can read any subtlety of intention or fine shades of meaning.
In a lesser degree this is true also of Japan. No doubt European readers,
especially of such word-rich languages as English or Russian, vary greatly
among themselves in regard to the extent of books they can understand and how
far they understand them; their power varies according to their vocabularies;
but the corresponding levels of understanding among the Chinese represent a far
greater expenditure of time and labour upon their attainment. A mandarin's
education in China is, mainly, learning to read.

And it may be that the consequent preoccupation of the
educated class during its most susceptible years -upon the Chinese classics
gave it a bias in favour of this traditional learning upon which it had spent
so much time and energy. Few men who have toiled to build up any system of
knowledge in their minds will willingly scrap it in favour of something strange
and new; this disposition is as characteristic of the West as of the East, it
is shown as markedly by the scholars of the British and American universities
as by any Chinese mandarins, and the British at the present time, in spite of
the great and manifest advantages in popular education and national propaganda
the change would give them, refuse to make any move from their present barbaric
orthography towards a phonetic alphabet and spelling. The peculiarities of the
Chinese script, and 'the educational system arising out of that script, must
have acted age after age as an invincible filter that favoured the plastic and
scholarly mind as against the restive and originating type, and kept the latter
out of positions of influence and authority. There is much that is plausible in
this explanation.

There have been several attempts to simplify the Chinese
writing and to adopt an alphabetical system. In the early days of Buddhism in
China, when there was a considerable amount of translation from Sanskrit, Indian
influences came near to achieving this end; two Chinese alphabets were indeed
invented, and each had some little use. But what hindered the general adoption
of these, and what stands in the way of any phonetic system of Chinese writing
today, is this, that while the literary script and phraseology is the same from
one end of China to the other, the spoken language of the common people, both
in pronunciation and in its familiar idioms, varies so widely that men from one
province may be incomprehensible to men from another. There is, however, a
«standard Chinese», a rather bookish spoken idiom, which is generally
understood by educated people; and it is upon the possibility of applying an
alphabetical system of writing to this standard Chinese that the hopes of
modern educational reformers in China are based at the present time. For fresh
attempts are now being made to release the Chinese mind from this ancient
entanglement.

A Chinese alphabet has been formed; it is taught in the
common schools, and newspapers and pamphlets are issued in it. And the rigid
examination system that killed all intellectual initiatives has been destroyed.
There has also been a considerable simplification in the direction of
introducing spoken idioms into written Chinese. This makes for ease and
lucidity; even in the old characters such Chinese is more easily read and
written, and it is far better adapted than classical Chinese to, the needs of
modern literary expression.

The very success and early prosperity and general contentment
of China in the past must have worked to justify in that land all the natural
self-complacency and conservatism of mankind. No animal will change when its
conditions are «good enough» for present survival. And in this matter man is
still an animal. Until the nineteenth century, for more than two thousand
years, there was little in the history of China that could cause any serious
doubts in the mind of a Chinaman of the general superiority of his own
civilization to that of the rest of the world, and there was no reason,
apparent therefore for any alteration. China produced a profusion of beautiful
art, some delightful poetry, astonishing cookery, and thousands of millions of
glowingly pleasant lives generation after generation. Her ships followed her marvellous
inland waterways, and put to sea but rarely, and then only to India or Borneo
as their utmost adventure.\ [#fn6]_  (Until the sixteenth century we must remember
European seamen never sailed out into the Atlantic Ocean. The Norse discovery
of America, the Phoenician circumnavigation of Africa, were exceptional feats.)
And these things were attained without any such general boredom, servitude
indignity and misery as underlay the rule of the rich in the Roman Empire.
There was much poverty, much discontent, but it was not massed poverty, it was
not a necessary popular discontent. For a thousand years the Chinese system,
though it creaked and swayed at times, seemed proof against decay. Dynastic
changes there were, rebellions, phases of disorder; famines, pestilences; two
great invasions that set foreign dynasties upon the throne of the Son of
Heaven, but no such shock as to revolutionize the order of the daily round. The
emperors and dynasties might come and go; the mandarins, the examinations, the
classics, and the traditions and habitual life remained. China's civilization
had already reached its culmination in the seventh century A.D., its crowning
period was the Tang period; and though it continued to spread slowly and
steadily into Annam, into Cambodia, into Siam, into Tibet, into Nepal, Korea,
Mongolia, and Manchuria, there is henceforth little more than such geographical
progress to record of it in this history for a thousand years.

.. [#fn5] It is doubtful if the Chinese knew of the mariner’s compass. Hirth, :t:`Ancient History of China`, p. 126 sqq., comes to the conclusion, after a careful examination of all data, although it is probable something like the compass was known in high antiquity, the knowledge of it was lost for a long time afterwards, until the Middle Ages, re reappears as an instrument in the hands of geomancers (people who selected favourable sites for graves, etc.). The earliest unmistakable mention of its use as a guide to mariners occurs in a work of the 12th century and refers to its use on foreign ships trading between China and Sumatra. Hirth is rather inclined to assume that Arab travellers may have seen it in the hands of Chinese Geomancers and applied its use to navigation, so that it was afterwards brought back by them to China as the "mariner’s compass." —J. J. L. D.

.. [#fn6] But Mr. Vogan tells me that rock carvings of a distinctively Chinese character have been found in New Zealand and New Caledonia.
