
30.9 The Travels of Yuan Chwang
========================================================================

.. _Figure 562:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0562.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0562.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 562

    Figure 562: Map — Yuan Chwang's route to India, 629-645 A.D.

In the year 629, the year after the arrival of Muhammad's
envoys at Canton and. thirty odd years after the landing of Pope Gregory's
missionaries in England, a certain learned and devout Buddhist named Yuan
Chwang started out from Sian-fu, Tai-tsung's capital, upon a great journey to
India. He was away sixteen years, he returned in 645, and he wrote an account
of his travels which is treasured as a Chinese classic. One or two points about
his experiences are to be noted here because they contribute to our general
review of the state of the world in the seventh century A.D.

Yuan Chwang was as eager for marvels and as credulous as
Herodotus, and without the latter writer's fine sense of history; be could
never pass a monument or ruin without learning some fabulous story about it;
Chinese ideas of the dignity of literature perhaps prevented him from telling
us much detail of how he travelled, who were his attendants, how he was lodged,
or what he ate and how he paid his expenses-details precious to the historian;
nevertheless, he gives us a series of illuminating flashes upon China, Central
Asia, and India in the period now under consideration.

His journey was an enormous one. He went and came back by way
of the Pamirs. He went by the northern route crossing the desert of Gobi,
passing along the southern slopes of the Thien Shan, skirting the great deep
blue lake of Issik Kul, and so to Tashkend and Samarkand, and then more or less
in the footsteps of Alexander the Great southward to the Khyber Pass and
Peshawar. He returned by the southern route, crossing the Pamirs from
Afghanistan to Kashgar, and so along the line of retreat the Yue-Chi had
followed in the reverse direction seven centuries before, and by Yarkand, along
the slopes of the Kuen Lun to rejoin his former route near the desert end of
the Great Wall. Each route involved some hard mountaineering. His journeyings
in India are untraceable; he was there fourteen years, and he went all over the
peninsula from Nepal to Ceylon.

At that time there was an imperial edict forbidding foreign
travel, so that Yuan Chwang started from Sian-fu like an escaping criminal.
There was a pursuit to prevent him carrying out his project. How he bought a
lean red-coloured horse that knew the desert paths from a strange grey-beard,
how he dodged a frontier guard-house with the help of a «foreign person» who
made him a bridge of brushwood lower down the river, how he crossed the desert
guided by the bones of men and cattle, how he saw a mirage, and how twice he
narrowly escaped being shot by arrows when he was getting water near the
watch-towers on the desert track, the reader will find in the 
*Life.* He lost his way in the desert of
Gobi, and for four nights and five days he had no water; when he was in the
mountains among the glaciers, twelve of his party were frozen to death. All
this is in the Life; he tells little of it in his own account of his travels.

He shows us the Turks, this new development of the Hun
tradition, in possession not only of what is now Turkestan but all along the
northern route. He mentions many cities and considerable cultivation. He is
entertained by various rulers, allies of or more or less nominally tributaries
to China, and among others by the Khan of the Turks, a magnificent person in
green satin, with his long hair tied with silk.

«The gold embroidery of this grand tent shone with a
dazzling splendour; the ministers of the presence in attendance sat on mats in
long rows on either side all dressed in magnificent brocade robes, while the
rest of the retinue on duty stood behind. You saw that although it was a case
of a frontier ruler, yet there was an air of distinction and elegance. The Khan
came out from his tent about thirty paces to meet Yuan Chwang, who, after a
courteous greeting, entered the tent. . . . After a short interval envoys from
China and Kao-chang were admitted and presented their despatches and
credentials, which the Khan perused. He was much elated, and caused the envoys
to be seated; then he ordered wine and music for himself and them and
grape-syrup, for the pilgrim. Hereupon all pledged each other, and the filling
and draining of the wine cups made a din and bustle, while the mingled music of
various instruments rose loud: although the airs were the popular strains of
foreigners, yet they pleased the senses and exhilarated the mental faculties.
After a little, piles of roasted beef and mutton were served for the others,
and lawful food, such as cakes, milk, candy, honey, and grapes, for the
pilgrim. After the entertainment, grape syrup was again served and the Khan
invited Yuan Chwang to improve the occasion, whereupon the pilgrim expounded
the doctrines of the 'ten virtues,' compassion for animal life, and the
paramitas and emancipation. The Khan, raising his hands, bowed, and gladly
believed and accepted the teaching».

Yuan Chwang's account of Samarkand is of a large and
prosperous city, «a great commercial *entrepôt*,
the country about it very fertile, abounding in trees and flowers and yielding
many fine horses. Its inhabitants were skilful craftsmen, smart and energetic».
At that time we must remember there was hardly such a thing as a town in
Anglo-Saxon England.

As his narrative approached his experiences in India,
however, the pious and learned pilgrim in Yuan Chwang got the better of the
traveller, and the book becomes congested with monstrous stories of incredible
miracles. Nevertheless, we get an impression of houses, clothing, and the like,
closely resembling those of the India of today. Then, as now, the kaleidoscopic
variety of an Indian crowd contrasted with the blue uniformity of the multitude
in China. In the time of Buddha it is doubtful if there were reading and
writing in India; now reading and writing were quite common accomplishments.
Yuan Chwang gives an interesting account of a great Buddhist university at
Nalanda, where ruins have quite, recently been discovered and excavated.
Nalanda and Taxilla seem to have been considerable educational centres as early
as the opening of the schools of Athens. The caste system Yuan Chwang found
fully established in spite of Buddha, and the Brahmins were now altogether in
the ascendant. He names the four main castes we have mentioned in Chap. XVIII,
sec 4 (q.v.), but his account of their functions is rather different. The
Sudras, he says, were the tillers of the soil. Indian writers say that their
function was to wait upon the three «twice born» castes above them.

But, as we have already intimated, Yuan Chwang's account of
Indian realities is swamped by his accumulation of legends and pious
inventions. For these he had come, and in these, he rejoiced. The rest, as we
shall see, was a task that had been set him. The faith of Buddha which in the
days of Asoka, and even so late as Kaniska, was still pure enough to be a noble
inspiration, we now discover absolutely lost in a wilderness of preposterous
rubbish, a philosophy of endless Buddhas, tales of manifestations and marvels
like a Christmas pantomime, immaculate conceptions by six-tusked elephants,
charitable princes giving themselves up to be eaten by starving tigresses,
temples built over a sacred nail-paring, and the like. We cannot give such
stories here; if the reader likes that sort of thing, he must go to the
publications of the Royal Asiatic Society or the India Society, where be will
find a delirium of such imaginations. And in competition with this Buddhism,
intellectually undermined as it now was and smothered in gilded decoration,
Brahminism was everywhere gaining ground again, as Yuan Chwang notes with
regret.

Side by side with these evidences of a vast intellectual
decay in India we may note the repeated appearance in Yuan Chwang's narrative
of ruined and deserted cities. Much of the country was still suffering from the
ravages of the Ephthalites and the consequent disorders. Again and again we
find such passages as this: «He went north-east through a great forest, the
road being narrow, dangerous path, with wild buffalo and wild elephants, and
robbers and hunters always in wait to kill travellers, and emerging from the
forest he reached the country of Kou-shih-na- ka-lo (Kusinagara). The city
walls were in ruins, and the towns and villages were deserted. The brick
foundations of the 'old city' (that is, the city which had been the capital)
were above ten li in circuit; there were very few inhabitants, the interior of
the city being a wild waste». This ruin was, however, by no means universal;
there is at least as much mention of crowded cities and villages and. busy
cultivations.

The *Life* tells of
many hardships upon the return journey: he fell among robbers; the great
elephant that was carrying the bulk of his possessions was drowned; he had much
difficulty in getting fresh transport. Here we cannot deal with these
adventures.

The return of Yuan Chwang to Sian-fu, the Chinese capital,
was, we gather, a triumph. Advance couriers must have told of his coming. There
was a public holiday the streets were decorated by gay banners and made glad
with music. He was escorted into the city with great pomp and ceremony. Twenty
horses were needed to carry the spoils of his travels; he had brought with him
hundreds of Buddhist books written in Sanskrit, and made of trimmed leaves of
palm and birch bark strung together in layers; he had many images great and
small of Buddha, in gold, silver, crystal, and sandal-wood; he had holy
pictures, and no fewer than one hundred and fifty well authenticated true
relics of Buddha. Yuan Chwang was presented to the emperor, who treated him as
a personal friend, took him into the palace, and questioned him day by day
about the wonders of these strange lands in which he had stayed so long. But
while the emperor asked about India, the pilgrim was disposed only to talk
about Buddhism.

The subsequent history of Yuan Chwang contains two
incidents that throw light upon the mental workings of this great monarch, Tai-tsung,
who was probably quite as much a Moslem as he was a Christian or a Buddhist.
The trouble about all religious specialists is that they know too much about
their own religion and how it differs from others; the advantage, or
disadvantage, of such creative statesmen as Tai-tsung and Constantine the Great
is that they know comparatively little of such matters. Evidently the
fundamental good of all these religions seemed to Tai-tsung to be much the same
fundamental good. So it was natural to him to propose that Yuan Chwang should
now give up the religious life and come into his foreign office, a proposal
that Yuan Chwang would not entertain for a moment. The emperor then insisted at
least upon a written account of the travels, and so got this classic we, treasure.
And finally Tai-tsung, proposed to this highly saturated Buddhist that he
should now use his knowledge of Sanskrit in translating the works of the great
Chinese teacher, Lao Tse, so as to make them available for Indian readers. It
seemed, no doubt, to the emperor a fair return and a useful service to the
fundamental good that lies beneath all religions. On the whole, he thought Lao
Tse might very well rank with or even a little above Buddha, and therefore that
if his work was put before the Brahmins, they would receive it gladly. In much
the same spirit Constantine the Great had done his utmost to make Arius and
Athanasius settle down amicably together. But naturally enough this suggestion
was repulsed by Yuan Chwang. He retired to a monastery and spent the rest of
his years translating as much as he could of the Buddhist literature he had
brought with him into elegant Chinese writing.
