37.1 The Bonaparte Family in Corsica
========================================================================
And now we come to one of the most illuminating figures in modern history,
the figure of an adventurer and a wrecker, whose story seems to display with an
extraordinary vividness the universal subtle conflict of egotism, vanity, and
personality with the weaker, wider claims of the common good. Against this
background of confusion and stress, and hope, this strained and heaving France
and Europe, this stormy and tremendous dawn, appears this dark little archaic
personage, hard, compact, capable, unscrupulous, imitative, and neatly vulgar.
He was born (1769) in the still half-barbaric island of Corsica, the son of a
rather prosaic father, a lawyer who had been first a patriotic Corsican against
the French monarchy which was trying to subjugate Corsica, and who had then gone
over to the side of the invader. His mother was of sturdier stuff, passionately
patriotic and a strong and managing woman. (She birched her sons; on one
occasion she birched Napoleon when he was sixteen.) There were numerous brothers
and sisters, and the family pursued the French authorities with importunities
for rewards and jobs. Except for Napoleon it seems to have been a thoroughly
commonplace, «hungry» family. He was clever, bad-tempered, and overbearing. From
his mother he had acquired a romantic Corsican patriotism.

Through the patronage of the French governor of Corsica he got an education
first at the military school of Brienne and at then the military school of
Paris, from which he passed into the artillery in 1785. He was an industrious
student both of mathematics and history, his memory was prodigiously good, and
he made copious notebooks, which still exist. These note- books show no very
exceptional intelligence, and they contain short pieces of original composition
upon suicide and similar adolescent topics. He fell, early under the spell of
Rousseau; he developed sensibility and a scorn for the corruptions of
civilization. In 1786 he wrote a pamphlet against a Swiss pastor who had
attacked Rousseau. It was a very ordinary adolescent production, rhetorical and
imitative. He dreamt of an independent Corsica, freed from the French. With the
revolution, he became an ardent republican and a supporter of the new French
regime in Corsica. For some years, until the fall of Robespierre, he remained a
Jacobin.

