
37.4 Napoleon I, Emperor, 1804-1814
========================================================================

.. _Figure 904:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0904.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0904.png
    :figclass: inline-figure left
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 904

    Figure 904: Napoleon as Emperor

We will not detail the steps by which Napoleon became Emperor. His coronation
was the most extraordinary revival of stale history that it is possible to
imagine. Cæsar was no longer the model; Napoleon was playing now at being
Charlemagne. He was crowned emperor, not indeed at Rome, but in the cathedral of
Notre-Dame in Paris; the Pope (Pins VII) had been brought from Rome to perform
the ceremony; and at the climax Napoleon I seized the crown, waved the Pope
aside, and. crowned himself. The attentive reader of this Outline will know that
a thousand years before this would have had considerable significance; in 1804
it was just a ridiculous scene. In 1806 Napoleon revived another venerable,
antiquity, and, following still the footsteps of Charlemagne, crowned himself
with the iron crown of Lombardy in the cathedral of Milan. All this mummery was
to have a wonderful effect upon the imagination of western Germany, which was to
remember that it, too, had been a part of the empire of Charlemagne.

The four daughter republics of France were now to become kingdoms; in 1806 he
set up brother Louis in Holland and brother Joseph in Naples. But the story of
the subordinate kingdoms he created in Europe, helpful though this free handling
of frontiers was towards the subsequent unification of Italy and Germany, is too
complex and evanescent for this Outline.

The pact between the new Charlemagne and the new Leo did not hold good for
very long. In 1807 he began to bully the Pope, and in 1811 he made him a close
prisoner at Fontainebleau. There does not seem to have been much reason in these
proceedings. They estranged all Catholic opinion, as his coronation had
estranged all liberal opinion. He ceased to stand either for the old or the new.
The new he had betrayed; the old be had failed to win. He stood at last for
nothing but himself.

There seems to have been as little reason in the foreign policy that now
plunged Europe into a fresh cycle of wars. Having quarreled with Great Britain
too soon, he (1804) assembled a vast, army at Boulogne for the conquest of
England, regardless of the naval situation. He even struck a medal and erected a
column at Boulogne to commemorate the triumph of this projected invasion. In
some «Napoleonic» fashion the British fleet was to be decoyed away, this army of
Boulogne was to be smuggled across the Channel on a flotilla. Of rafts and
boats, and London was to be captured before the fleet returned. At the same time
his aggressions in south Germany forced Austria and Russia steadily into a
coalition with Britain against him. In 1805 two fatal blows wore struck at any
hope be may have entertained of ultimate victory, by the British Admirals Calder
and Nelson. In July the former inflicted a serious reverse upon the French fleet
in the Bay of Biscay; in October the latter destroyed the joint fleets of France
and Spain at the battle of Trafalgar. Nelson died splendidly upon the Victory,
victorious Thereafter Napoleon was left with Britain in pitiless opposition,
unattainable and unconquerable, able to strike here or against him along all the
coasts of Europe.

But for a while the moral wound of Trafalgar was hidden from the French mind
altogether. They heard merely that «storms have caused us to lose some ships of
the line after an imprudent fight». After Calder's victory he had snatched his
army from Boulogne, rushed it across half Europe, and defeated the Austrian and
Russian armies at Ulm and Austerlitz. Under these inauspicious circumstances
Prussia, came into the war against him, and was utterly defeated and broken at
the battle of Jena (1806). Although Austria and Prussia were broken, Russia was
still a fighting power, and the next year was devoted, to this unnecessary
antagonist of the French, against whom an abler and saner ruler would never have
fought at all. We cannot trace in any detail the difficulties of the Polish
campaign against Russia; Napoleon was roughly handled at Pultusk, which he
announced in Paris as a brilliant victory and again at Eylau. Then the Russians
were defeated at Friedland, (1807). As yet he had never, touched Russian soil,
the Russians were still, as unbeaten as the British, but now came an
extraordinary piece of good fortune for Napoleon. By a mixture of boasting,
subtlety, and flattery be won over the young and ambitious Tsar, Alexander I he
was just thirty years old to form an alliance. The two emperors met on a raft in
the middle of the Niemen at Tilst, and there came to an understanding.

This meeting was an occasion for sublime foolishness on the part of both the
principle actors. Alexander had imbibed much liberalism during his education at
the court of Catherine II, and was all for freedom, education, and the new order
of the world subject to, his own pre-eminence. «'He would gladly have everyone
free», said one of his early associates, «provided that everyone was prepared to
do freely exactly what he wished». And he declared that he would have abolished
serfdom if it had cost him his head-if only civilization had been more advanced.
He made war against France, he said, because Napoleon was a tyrant, to free the
French people. After Friedland he saw Napoleon in a different light. These two
men met eleven days after that rout; Alexander no doubt in the state of
explanatory exaltation natural to his type during a mood of change.

.. _Figure 906:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0906.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0906.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 906

    Figure 906: Tsar Alexander I

To Napoleon the meeting must have been extremely gratifying. This was his
first meeting with an emperor upon terms of equality. Like all men of limited
vision, this man was a snob to the bone, his continual solicitude for big titles
shows as much, and here was a real emperor, a born emperor, taking his
three-year-old dignities as equivalent to the authentic imperialism of Moscow.
Two imaginations soared together upon the raft at Tilsit. «What is Europe?»
said. Alexander. «We are Europe». They discussed the affairs of Prussia and
Austria in that spirit, they divided Turkey in anticipation, they arranged for
the conquest of India, and indeed of most of Asia, and that Russia should take
Finland from the Swedes; and they disregarded the disagreeable fact that the
greater part of the world's surface is sea, and that on the seas the British
fleets sailed now unchallenged. Close at hand was Poland, ready to rise up and
become the passionate ally of France had Napoleon but willed it so. But he was
blind to Poland. It was a day of visions without vision. Napoleon even then, it
seems, concealed the daring thought that be might one day marry a Russian
princess, a real princess. But that, he was to learn in 1810, was going a little
too far.

After, Tilsit there was a perceptible deterioration in Napoleon's quality; he
became rasher, less patient of obstacles, more and more the fated master of the
world, more and more intolerable to everyone he encountered.

In 1808 he committed a very serious blunder. Spain was his abject ally,
completely under his control, but he saw fit, to depose its Bourbon king in
order to promote his brother Joseph from the crown of the two Sicilies. Portugal
he had already conquered and the two kingdoms of Spain and Portugal were to be
united. Thereupon the Spanish arose in a state of patriotic fury, surrounded a
French army at Baylen, and compelled it to surrender. It was an astonishing
break in the French career of victory.

The British were not slow to seize the foothold this insurrection gave them.
A British army under Sir Arthur Wellesley (afterwards the Duke of Wellington)
landed in Portugal, defeated the French at Vimiero, and compelled them to retire
into Spain. The news of these reverses caused a very great excitement in Germany
and Austria, and the Tsar assumed a more arrogant attitude towards his ally.

There was another meeting of these two potentates at Erfurt, in which the
Tsar was manifestly less amenable to the dazzling tactics of Napoleon than he
had been. Followed four years of unstable «ascendancy» for France, while the
outlines on the map of Europe waved about like garments on a clothesline on a
windy day. Napoleon's personal empire grew by frank annexations to include
Holland, much of western Germany, much of Italy, and much of the, eastern
Adriatic coast. But one by one the French colonies were falling to the British,
and the British armies in the Spanish peninsula, with the Spanish auxiliaries,
slowly pressed the French northward. All Europe was getting very weary of
Napoleon and very indignant with him; his antagonists now were no longer merely
monarchs and ministers, but whole peoples also. The Prussians, after the
disaster of Jena in 1806, had set to work to put their house in order. Under the
leadership of Freiherr von Stein they had swept aside their feudalism, abolished
privilege and serfdom, organized popular education and popular patriotism,
accomplished, in fact, without any internal struggle nearly everything that
France had achieved, in 1789. By 1810 a new Prussia existed, the nucleus of a
new Germany. And now Alexander, inspired it would seem by dreams of world
ascendancy even crazier than his rivals, was posing again as the friend of
liberty. In 1810 fresh friction was created by Alexander's objection to
Napoleon's matrimonial ambitions. For he was now divorcing his old helper
Josephine, because she was childless, in order to secure the «continuity» of his
«dynasty». Napoleon, thwarted of a Russian princess, snubbed indeed by
Alexander, turned to Austria, and married the arch-duchess Marie Louise. The
Austrian statesmen read him aright. They were very ready to throw him their
princess. By that marriage Napoleon was captured for the dynastic system; he
might have been the maker of a new world, he preferred to be the son-in-law of
the old.

.. _Figure 908:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0908.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0908.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 908

    Figure 908: The Empire of Napoleon, 1810

In the next two years this adventurer's affairs crumbled apace. Nobody
believed in his pretensions any more. He was no, longer the leader and
complement of the revolution; no longer the embodied spirit of a world reborn he
was just a new and nastier sort of autocrat. He had, estranged all free-spirited
men, and he had antagonized the church. Kings and Jacobins were, at one, when it
came to, the question of his overthrow. Only base and self-seeking people
supported him, because he seemed to have the secret of success. Britain was now
his inveterate enemy, Spain was blazing with a spirit that surely a Corsican
should have understood; it needed only a breach with Alexander I to set this
empire of bluff and stage scenery swaying toward its downfall. The quarrel came.
Alexander's feelings for Napoleon had always been of a very mixed sort; he
envied Napoleon as a rival, and despised him as an underbred upstart. Moreover,
there was a kind of vague and sentimental greatness about Alexander; he was
given to mystical religiosity, he had the conception of a mission for Russia and
himself to bring peace to Europe and the world by destroying Napoleon. In that
respect he had an imaginative greatness Napoleon lacked. But bringing peace to
Europe seemed to him quite compatible with the annexation of Finland, most of
Poland, and of great portions of the Turkish empire. This man's mind moved in a
luminous fog. And particularly he wanted to resume trading with Britain, against
which Napoleon had set his face. For all the trade of Germany had been
dislocated and the mercantile classes embittered by the Napoleonic «Continental
System», which was to ruin Britain by excluding British goods from every country
in Europe. Russia had suffered more even than Germany.

The breach came in 1811, when Alexander withdrew from the. «Continental
System». In 1812 a great mass of armies, amounting altogether to 600,000 men,
began to move towards Russia under the supreme command of the new emperor. About
half this force was French; the rest was drawn from the French allies and
subject peoples. It was a conglomerate army like the army of Darius or the army
of Kavadh. The Spanish war was still going on; Napoleon made no attempt to end
it. Altogether, it drained away a quarter of a million men from France. He
fought his way across Poland and Russia to Moscow before the winter-for the most
part the Russian armies declined battle and even before the winter closed in
upon him his position became manifestly dangerous. He took Moscow, expecting
that this would oblige Alexander to make peace. Alexander would not make peace,
and Napoleon found himself in much the same position as Darius had been in 2,300
years before in South Russia. The Russians, still unconquered in a decisive
battle, raided his communications, wasted his army-disease helped them; even
before Napoleon reached Moscow 150,000 men had been lost. But he lacked the
wisdom of Darius, and would not retreat. The winter remained mild for an
unusually long time he could have escaped; but instead he remained in Moscow,
making impossible plans, at a loss. He had been marvellously lucky in all his
previous floundering; he had escaped undeservedly from Egypt, he had been saved
from destruction in Britain by the British naval victories; but now he was in
the net again, and this time he was not to escape. Perhaps be would have
wintered in Moscow, but the Russians smoked him out; they set fire to and burnt
most of the city.

It was late in October, too late altogether, before he decided to return. He
made an ineffectual attempt -to break through to a fresh line of retreat to the
south-west, and then turned the faces of the survivors of his Grand Army towards
the country they had devastated in their advance. Immense distances separated
them from any friendly territory. The winter was in no hurry. For a week the
Grand Army struggled through mud; then came sharp frosts, and then the first
flakes of snow, and then snow and snow . . .

Slowly, discipline dissolved. The hungry army spread it out in search of
supplies until it broke up into mere bands of marauders. The peasants, if only
in self-defense, rose against them, waylaid them, and murdered them; a cloud of
light cavalry—Scythians—still hunted them down. That retreat is one of the great
tragedies of history.

At last Napoleon and his staff and a handful of guards and attendants
reappeared in Germany, bringing no army with him, followed only by straggling
and demoralized bands. The Grand Army, retreating under Murat, reached
Konigsberg in a disciplined state, but only about a thousand strong out of six
hundred thousand. From Konigsberg Murat fell back to Posen. The Prussian
contingent had surrendered to the Russians; the Austrians had gone homeward to
the south. Everywhere scattered fugitives, ragged, lean, and frost-bitten,
spread the news of the disaster.

Napoleon's magic was nearly exhausted. He did not dare to stay with his
troops in Germany; he fled post haste to Paris. He began to order new levies and
gather fresh armies amidst the wreckage of his world empire. Austria turned
against him (1813); all Europe was eager to rise against this defaulting trustee
of freedom, this mere usurper. He had betrayed the new order; the old order he
had saved and revived now destroyed him. Prussia rose, and the German «War of
Liberation» began. Sweden joined his enemies. Later Holland revolted. Murat had
rallied about 14,000 Frenchmen round his disciplined nucleus in Posen, and this
force retreated through Germany, as a man might retreat who had Ventured into a
cageful of drugged lions and found that the effects of the drug were
evaporating. Napoleon, with fresh forces, took up the chief command in the
spring, won a great battle at Dresden, and then for a time he seemed to have
gone to pieces intellectually and morally. He became insanely irritable, with
moods of inaction. He did little or nothing to follow up the Battle of Dresden.
In September the «Battle of the Nations» was fought round and about Leipzig,
after which the Saxons, who had hitherto followed his star, went over to the
allies. The end of the year saw the French beaten back into France.

1814 was the closing campaign. France was invaded from the east and the
south; Swedes, Germans, Austrians, Russians, crossed the Rhine; British and
Spanish came through the Pyrenees. Once more Napoleon fought brilliantly, but
now he fought ineffectually. The eastern armies did not go much defeat him as
push past him, and Paris capitulated in March: A little later at Fontainebleau
the emperor abdicated.

In Provence, on his way out of the country, his life was endangered by a
royalist mob.

