
37.6 The Map of Europe in 1815
========================================================================

.. _Figure 918:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0918.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0918.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 918

    Figure 918: Map — Europe after the Congress of Vienna

For nearly forty years the idea of the Holy Alliance, the Concert of Europe
which arose out of it, and the series of congresses and conferences that
succeeded the concert, kept an insecure peace in war-exhausted Europe. Two main
things prevented that period from being a complete social and international
peace, and prepared the way for the cycle of wars between 1854 and 1871. The
first of these was the tendency of the royal courts concerned, towards the
restoration of unfair privilege and interference with freedom of thought and
writing and teaching. The second was the impossible system of boundaries drawn
by the diplomatists of Vienna.

The obstinate disposition of Monarchy to march back towards past conditions
was first and most particularly manifest in Spain. Here even the Inquisition was
restored. Across the Atlantic the Spanish colonies had followed the example of
the United States and revolted against the European Great Power system, when
Napoleon set up his brother Joseph upon the Spanish throne in 1910. The
Washington of South America was General Bolivar. Spain was unable to suppress
this revolt, it dragged on much as the United States War of Independence had
dragged on, and at last the suggestion was made by Austria in accordance with
the spirit of the Holy Alliance, that the European monarchs should assist Spain
in this struggle. This was opposed by Britain in Europe, but it was the prompt
action of President Monroe of the United States in 1823, which conclusively
warned off this projected monarchist restoration. He announced that the United
States would regard any extension of the European system in the Western
Hemisphere as a hostile act. Thus arose the Monroe Doctrine, which has kept the
Great Power system out of America for nearly a hundred years, and permitted the
new states of Spanish America to work out their destinies along their own lines.
But if Spanish monarchism lost its colonies, it could at least, under the
protection of the Concert of Europe, do what it chose in Europe. A popular
insurrection in Spain was crushed by a French army in 1823, with a mandate from
a European, congress, and simultaneously Austria suppressed a revolution in,
Naples. The moving spirit in this, conspiracy of governments against peoples was
the Austrian statesman, Metternich.

In 1824 Louis XVIII died, and was succeeded by that Count d'Artois whom we
have seen hovering as an emigre on the French frontiers in 1789; he took the
title of Charles X. Charles set himself to destroy the liberty of the press and
universities, and to restore absolute government; the Bum of a billion francs
was voted to compensate the nobles for the château burnings and sequestrations
of 1789. In 1830 Paris rose against this embodiment of the ancient regime, and
replaced him by the son of that sinister Philip, Duke of Orleans, whose
execution was one of the brightest achievements of the Terror. The other
continental monarchies, in face of the open approval of the revolution by Great
Britain and a strong liberal ferment in Germany and Austria, did not interfere
in this affair. After all, France was still a monarchy. This young man, Louis
Philippe (1830-48), remained the constitutional king of France for eighteen
years. He went down in 1848, a very eventful year for Europe, of which we shall
tell in the next chapter.

Such were the uneasy swayings of the peace of the Congress of Vienna, which
were provoked by the reactionary proceedings to which, sooner or later, all
monarchist courts seem by their very nature to gravitate. The stresses that
arose, from the unscientific map-making of the diplomatists gathered force more
deliberately, but they were even more dangerous to the peace of mankind. It is
extraordinarily inconvenient to administer together the affairs of peoples
speaking different languages and so reading different literatures and having
different general ideas, especially if those differences are exacerbated by
religious disputes. Only some strong mutual interest, such as the common
defensive needs of the Swiss mountaineers, can justify a close linking of
peoples of dissimilar languages and faiths; and even in Switzerland there is the
utmost local autonomy. Ultimately, when the Great Power tradition is certainly
dead and buried, those Swiss populations may gravitate towards their natural
affinities in Germany, France, and Italy. When, as in Macedonia, populations are
mixed in a patchwork of villages and districts, the cantonal system is
imperatively needed. But if the reader will look at the map of Europe as the
Congress of Vienna drew it, he will see that this gathering seems almost as if
it had planned the maximum of local exasperation. It destroyed the Dutch
Republic, quite needlessly, it lumped together the Protestant Dutch with the
French-speaking Catholics of the old Spanish (Austrian) Netherlands, a rid set
up a kingdom of the Netherlands.

It handed over not merely the old republic of Venice, but all of North Italy
as far as Milan to the German-speaking Austrians. French-speaking Savoy it
combined with pieces of Italy to restore the kingdom of Sardinia. Austria and
Hungary, already a sufficiently explosive mixture of discordant nationalities,
Germans, Hungarians, Czecho-Slovaks, Jugo-Slavs, Rumanians, and now Italians,
was made still more impossible by confirming Austria's Polish acquisitions of
1772 and 1795. The Polish people, being catho lic and republican-spirited, were
chiefly given over to the less civilized rule of the Greek-orthodox Tsar, but
important districts went to Protestant Prussia. The Tsar was also confirmed in
his acquisition of the entirely Alien Finns. The very dissimilar Norwegian and
Swedish peoples were bound together under one king. Germany, the reader will
see, was left in a particularly dangerous state of muddle. Prussia and Austria
were both partly in and partly out of a German confederation, which included a
multitude of minor states. The King of Denmark came into the German
confederation by virtue of certain German-speaking possessions in Holstein.
Luxembourg was included in the German Confederation, though its ruler was also
king of the Netherlands, and though many of its peoples talked French. Here was
a crazy tangle, an outrage on the common sense of mankind, a preposterous
disregard of the fact that the people who talk German and base their ideas on
German literature the people who talk Italian and base their ideas on Italian
literature, and the people who talk Polish and base their ideas on Polish
literature, will all be far better off and most helpful and least obnoxious to
the rest of mankind if they conduct their own affairs in their own idiom within
the ring fence of their own speech. Is it any wonder that one of the most
popular songs in Germany during this period declared that wherever the German
tongue was spoken, there was the German Fatherland?

Even today men are still reluctant to recognize that areas of government are
not matters for the bargaining and interplay of tsars and kings and foreign
offices. There is a natural and necessary political map of the World which
transcends these things. There is a best way possible of dividing any part of
the world into administrative areas, and a best possible kind of government for
every area, having regard to the speech and race of its, inhabitants, and it is
the common concern of all men of intelligence to secure those divisions and
establish those forms of government quite irrespective of diplomacies and flags,
«claims» and melodramatic «loyalties» and the existing political map of the
world. The natural political map of the world insists upon itself. It heaves and
frets beneath the artificial political map like some misfitted giant. In 1830
French-speaking Belgium, stirred up by the current revolution in France,
revolted against its Dutch association in the kingdom of the Netherlands, The
Powers, terrified at the possibility of a republic and of annexation to France,
hurried in to pacify this situation, and gave the Belgians a monarch from that
rich breeding-ground of monarchs, Germany, Leopold I of Saxe- Coburg Gotha.
There were also Ineffectual revolts in Italy and Germany in 1830, and a much
more serious one in Russian Poland. A republican government held out in Warsaw
for a year against Nicholas I (who succeeded Alexander in 1825), and was then
stamped out of existence with great violence and cruelty. The Polish language
was banned, and the Greek Orthodox church was substituted for the Roman Catholic
as the State religion . . .

An outbreak of the natural political map of the world, which occurred in
1821, ultimately secured the support of England, France, and Russia. This was
the insurrection of the Greeks against the Turks. For six years they fought a
desperate war, while the governments of Europe looked on. Liberal opinion
protested against this inactivity; volunteers from every European country joined
the insurgents, and at last; Britain, France, and Russia took joint action. The
Turkish fleet was destroyed by the French and English at the Battle of Navarino
(1827), and the Tsar invaded Turkey. By the treaty of Adrianople (1829) Greece
wits declared free, but she was not permitted to resume her ancient republican
traditions. There is a sort of historical indecency in a Greek monarchy. But a
Greek republic would have been dangerous to all monarchy in a Europe that
fretted under the ideas of the Holy Alliance. A German king was found for
Greece, one Prince Otto of Bavaria, slightly demented, but quite royal he gave
way to delusions about; his divine right, and was ejected in 1862 and Christian
governors were set up in the Danubian provinces (which are now Rumania) and,
Serbia (a part of the Jugo-Slav -region). This was a partial concession to the
natural political map, but much blood had still to run before the Turk was
altogether expelled from these lands.

A little later the natural political map was to assert itself in Italy and
Germany.

.. _Figure 921:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0921.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0921.png
    :figclass: full-figure
    :width: 600px
    :alt: Figure 921

    Figure 921: The Natural Political Map of Europe
