3.0 Natural Selection and Changes of Species
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

Now here it will be well to put plainly certain general facts about this new
thing, *life*, that was creeping in the shallow waters and intertidal muds of
the early Palaeozoic period, and which is perhaps confined to our planet
alone in all the immensity of space.

Life differs from all things whatever that are without life in certain
general aspects. There are the most wonderful differences among living things
to-day, but all living things past and present agree in possessing a *certain
power of growth*, all living things *take nourishment,* all living things
*move about* as they feed and grow, though the movement be no more than the
spread of roots through the soil, or of branches in the air. Moreover, living
things reproduce; they give rise to other living things, either by growing
and then dividing or by means of seeds or spores or eggs or other ways of
producing young. *Reproduction* is a characteristic of life.

No living thing goes on living forever. There seems to be a *limit of growth*
for every kind of living thing. Among very small and simple living things,
such as that microscopic blob of living matter the *Amoeba*, an individual
may grow and then divide completely into two new individuals, which again may
divide in their turn. Many other microscopic creatures live actively for a
time, grow, and then become quiet and inactive, enclose themselves in an
outer covering and break up wholly into a number of still smaller things,
spores, which are released and scattered and again grow into the likeness of
their parent. Among more complex creatures the reproduction is not usually
such simple division, though division does occur even in the case of many
creatures big enough to be visible to the unassisted eye. But the rule with
almost all larger beings is that the individual grows up to a certain limit
of size. Then, before it becomes unwieldy, its growth declines and stops. As
it reaches its full size it *matures*, it begins to produce young, which are
either born alive or hatched from eggs. But all of its body does not produce
young. Only a special part does that. After the individual has lived and
produced offspring for some time, it ages, and dies. It does so by a sort of
necessity. There is a practical limit to its life as well as to its growth.
These things are as true of plants as they are of animals. And they are not
true of things that do not live. Non-living things, such as crystals, grow,
but they have no set limits of growth or size, they do *not move of their own
accord* and there is *no, stir within them.* Crystals once formed may last
unchanged for millions of years. There is *no reproduction* for any non-
living thing.

This growth and dying and reproduction of living things leads to some very
wonderful consequences. The young which a living thing produces are either
directly, or after some intermediate stages and changes (such as the changes
of a caterpillar and butterfly), like the parent living thing. But they are
never exactly like it or like each other. There is always a slight
difference, which we speak of as *individuality*. A thousand butterflies this
year may produce two or three thousand next year; these latter will look to
us almost exactly like their predecessors, but each one will have just that
slight difference. It is hard for us to see individuality in butterflies
because we do not observe them very closely, but it is easy for us to see it
in men. All the men and women in the world now are descended from the men and
women of A.D. 1800, but not one of us now is exactly the same as one of that
vanished generation. And what is true of men and butterflies is true of every
sort of living thing, of plants as of animals. Every species changes all its
individualities in each generation. That is true of all the minute creatures
that swarmed and reproduced and died in the Archaeozoic and Proterozoic seas,
as it is of men today.

Every species of living things is continually dying and being born again, as
a, multitude of fresh individuals.

Consider, then, what must happen to a new-born generation of living things of
any species. Some of the individuals will be stronger or sturdier or better
suited to succeed in life in some way than the rest, many individuals will be
weaker or less suited. In particular single cases any sort of luck or
accident may occur, but *on the whole* the better equipped individuals will
live and grow up and reproduce themselves and the weaker will *as a rule* go
under. The latter will be less able to get food, to fight their enemies and
pull through. So that in each generation there is as it were a picking over
of a species, a picking out of most of the weak or unsuitable and a
preference for the strong and suitable. This process is called Natural
Selection or the Survival of the Fittest.\ [#fn01]_

It follows, therefore, from the fact that living things grow and breed and
die, that every species, so long as the conditions under which it lives
remain the same, becomes more and more perfectly fitted to those conditions
in every generation.

But now suppose those conditions change, then the sort of individual that
used to succeed may now fail to succeed and a sort of individual that could
not get on at all under the old conditions may now find its opportunity.
These species will change, therefore, generation by generation; the old sort
of individual that used to prosper and dominate will fail and die out and the
new sort of individual will become the rule â€“ until the general character of
the species changes.

Suppose, for example, there is some little furry whitey brown animal living
in a bitterly cold land which is usually under snow. Such individuals as have
the thickest, whitest fur will be least hurt by the cold, less seen by their
enemies, and less conspicuous as they seek their prey. The fur of this
species will thicken and its whiteness increase with every generation, until
there is no advantage in carrying any more fur.

Imagine now a change of climate that brings warmth into the land, sweeps away
the snows, makes white creatures glaringly visible during the greater part of
the year and thick fur an encumbrance. Then every individual with a touch of
brown in its colouring and a thinner fur will find itself at an advantage,
and very white and heavy fur will be a handicap. There will be a weeding out
of the white in favour of the brown in each generation. If this change of
climate come about too quickly, it may of course exterminate the species
altogether; but if it come about gradually, the species, although it may have
a hard time, may yet be able to change itself and adapt itself generation by
generation. This change and adaptation is called the Modification of Species.

.. _Figure 16:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0016.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :alt: Figure 16
    :width: 280px
    :height: 233px
    :target: ../_static/figures/0016.png

    Figure 16: Diagram of Life in the Later Paleozoic Age.

    Life is creeping out of the water. An insect like a dragonfly is shown. There
    were amphibia like gigantic newts and salamanders, and even primitive
    reptiles in these swamps.


Perhaps this change of climate does not occur all over the lands inhabited by
the species, maybe it occurs only on one side of some great arm of the sea or
some great mountain range or such-like divide, and not on the other. A warm
ocean current like the Gulf Stream may be deflected, and flow so as to warm
one side of the barrier, leaving the other still cold. Then on the cold side
this species will still be going on to its utmost possible furriness and
whiteness and on the other side it will be modifying towards brownness and a
thinner coat. At the same time there will probably be other changes going on;
a difference in the paws perhaps, because one half of the species will be
frequently scratching through snow for its food, while the other will be
scampering over brown earth. Probably also the difference of climate will
mean differences in the sort of food available, and that may produce
differences in the teeth and the digestive organs. And there may be changes
in the sweat and oil glands of the skin due to the changes in the fur, and
these will affect the excretory, organs and all the internal chemistry of the
body. And so through all the structure of the creature. A time will come when
the two separated varieties of this formerly single species will become so
unlike each other as to be recognizably different species. Such a splitting
up of a species in the course of generations into two or more species is
called the Differentiation of Species.

And it should be clear to the reader that given these elemental facts of
life, given growth and death and reproduction with individual variation in a
world that changes, life *must* change in this way, modification and
differentiation *must* occur, old species must disappear, and new ones
appear. We have chosen for our instance here a familiar sort of animal, but
what is true of furry beasts in snow and ice is true of all life, and equally
true of the soft jellies and simple beginnings, that flowed and crawled for
hundreds of millions of years between the tidal levels and in the shallow,
warm waters of the Proterozoic seas.

The early life of the early world when the blazing sun rose and set in only a
quarter of the time it now takes, when the warm seas poured in great tides
over the sandy and muddy shores of the rocky lands and the air was full of
clouds and steam, must have been modified and varied and species must have
developed at a great pace. Life was probably as swift and short as the days
and years; the generations, which natural selection picked over, followed one
another in rapid succession.

Natural selection is a slower process with man than with any other creature.
It takes twenty years or more before an ordinary human being in western
Europe grows up and reproduces. In the case of most animals the new
generation is on trial in a year or less. With such simple and lowly beings,
however, as first appeared in the primordial seas, growth and reproduction
was probably a matter of a few brief hours or even of a few brief minutes.
Modification and differentiation of species must accordingly have been
extremely rapid, and life had already developed a great variety of widely
contrasted forms before it began to leave traces in the rocks. The Record of
the Rocks does not begin, therefore, with any group of closely related forms
from which all subsequent and existing creatures are descended. It begins in
the midst of the game, with nearly every main division of the animal kingdom
already represented.\ [#fn02]_ Plants are already plants, and animals animals.
The curtain rises on a drama in the sea that has already begun, and has been
going on for some time. The brachiopods are discovered already in their
shells, accepting and consuming much the same sort of food that oysters and
mussels do now; the great water scorpions crawl among the seaweeds, the
trilobites roll up into balls, and unroll and scuttle away. In that ancient
mud and among those early weeds there was probably as rich and abundant and
active a life of infusoria and the like as one finds in a drop of ditchwater
today. In the ocean waters, too, down to the utmost downward limit to which
light could filter, then as now, there was an abundance of minute and
translucent, and in many cases phosphorescent, beings.

But though the ocean and intertidal waters already swarmed with life, the
land above the high-tide line was still, so far as we can guess, a stony
wilderness without a trace of life.

.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#fn01] It might be called with more exactness the *Survival of the Fitter*.
.. [#fn02] See Evans, The Sudden Appearance of Cambrian Fauna, (:t:`Proc. of XIe Congress Geolog. Inst. 1910`) for a discussion of this.
