16.1 Picture Writing
================================================================
In the four preceding chapters (XII to XV) we have sketched in broad outline
the development of the chief human communities from the primitive beginnings
of the heliolithic culture to the great historical kingdoms and empires in
the sixth century B.C. We must now study a little more closely the general
process of social change, the growth of human ideas, and the elaboration of
human relationships that was going on during these ages between 10,000 B.C.
and 500 B.C. What we have done so far is to draw the map and name the chief
kings and empires, to define the relations in time and space of Babylonia,
Assyria, Egypt, Phoenicia, Cnossos, and the like; we come now to the real
business of history, which is to get down below these outer forms to the
thoughts and lives of individual men.

.. _Figure 171:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0171.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0171.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 171

    Figure 171: American Indian Picture-Writing

    No. 1, painted on a rock on the shore of Lake Superior, records an expedition
    across the lake, in which five canoes took part. The upright strokes in each
    indicate the number of the crew, and the bird represents a chief, "The
    Kingfisher". The three circles (suns) under the arch (of heaven) indicate
    that the voyage lasted three days, and the tortoise, a symbol of land,
    denotes a safe arrival. No. 2 is a petition sent to the United States
    Congress by a group of Indian tribes, asking for fishing rights in certain
    small lakes. The tribes are represented by their totems, martens, bear, man
    and catfish, led by the crane. Lines running from the heart and eye of each
    animal to the heart and eye of the crane denote that they are all of one
    mind; and a line runs from the eye of the crane to the lakes, shown in the
    crude little "map" in the lower left-hand corner.

By far the most important thing that was going on during those fifty or sixty
centuries of social development was the invention of writing and its gradual
progress to importance in human affairs. It was a now instrument for the
human mind, an enormous enlargement of its range of action, a new means of
continuity. We have seen how in later Paleolithic and early Neolithic times
the elaboration of articulate speech gave men a mental handhold for
consecutive thought, and a vast enlargement of their powers of co-operation.
For a time this now acquirement seems to have overshadowed their earlier
achievement of drawing, and possibly it checked the use of gesture. But
drawing presently reappeared again, for record, for signs, for the joy of
drawing. Before real writing came picture writing, such as is still practiced
by the Amerindians, the Bushmen, and savage and barbaric people in all parts
of the world. It is essentially a drawing of things and acts, helped out by
heraldic indications of proper Dames, and by strokes and dots to represent
days and distances and such-like quantitative ideas.

Quite kindred to such picture-writing is the pictograph that one finds still
in use today in international railway timetables upon the continent of
Europe, where a little black sign of a cup indicates a stand-up buffet for
light refreshments; a crossed knife and fork, a restaurant; a little
steamboat, a transfer to a steamboat; and a postilion's born, a diligence.
Similar signs are used in the well-known Michelin guides for automobilists in
Europe, to show a post office (envelope) or a telephone (telephone receiver).
The quality of hotels is shown by an inn with one, two, three, or four
gables, and so forth. Similarly, the roads of Europe are marked with wayside
signs representing a gate, to indicate a level crossing ahead, a sinuous bend
for a dangerous curve, and the like. From such pictographic signs to the
first elements of Chinese writing is not a very long stretch.

In Chinese writing there are still traceable a number of pictographs. Most
are now difficult to recognize. A mouth was originally written as a mouth-
shaped hole, and is now, for convenience of brushwork, squared; a child,
originally a recognizable little mannikin, is now a hasty wriggle and a
cross; the sun, originally a large circle with a dot in the centre, has been
converted, for the sake of convenience of combination, into a crossed oblong,
which is easier to make with a brush. By combining these pictographs, a
second order of ideas is expressed. For example, the pictograph for mouth
combined with pictograph for vapour expressed "words".\ [#fn1]_

From such combinations one passes to what are called ideograms: the sign for
"words" and the sign for "tongue" combine to make "speech"; the sign for
"roof" and the sign for "Pig" make "home" for in the early domestic economy
of China the pig was as important as it used to be in Ireland. But, as we
have already noted earlier, the Chinese language consists of a comparatively
few elementary monosyllabic sounds, which are all used in a great variety of
meanings, and the Chinese soon discovered that a number of these pictographs
and ideographs could be used also to express other ideas, not so conveniently
pictured, but having the same sound.

Characters so used are called phonograms. For example, the sound *fang* meant
not only "boat", but "a place", "spinning", "fragrant", "inquire", and
several other meanings according to the context. But while a boat is easy to
draw, most of the other meanings are undrawable. How can one draw "fragrant"
or "inquire"? The Chinese, therefore, took the same sign for all these
meanings of "fang", but added to each of them another distinctive sign, the
*determinative*, to show what sort of *fang* was intended. A "place" was
indicated by the same sign as for "boat" (*fang*) and the determinative sign
for "earth"; "spinning" by the sign for *fang* and the sign for "silk";
"inquire" by the sign for *fang*, and the sign for "words", and so on.

One may perhaps make this development of pictographs, ideograms, and
phonograms a little clearer by taking an analogous case in English. Suppose
we were making up a sort of picture writing in English, then it would be very
natural to use a square with a slanting line to suggest a lid, for the word
and thing box. That would be a pictograph. But now suppose we had a round
sign for money, and suppose we put this sign inside the box sign, that would
do for "cash-box" or "treasury". That would be an ideogram. But the word
"box" is used for other things than boxes. There is the box shrub which gives
us boxwood. It would be hard to draw a recognizable box-tree distinct from
other trees, but it is quite easy to put our sign "box", and add our sign for
shrub as a determinative to determine that it is that sort of box and not a
common box that we want to express. And then there is "box", the verb,
meaning to fight with fists. Here, again, we need a determinative; we might
add the two crossed swords, a sign which is used very often upon maps to
denote a battle. A box at a theatre needs yet another determinative, and so
we go on, through a long series of phonograms.

Now it is manifest that here in the Chinese writing is a very peculiar and
complex system of sign-writing. A very great number of characters have to be
learnt and the mind habituated to their use. The power it possesses to carry
ideas and discussion is still ungauged by western standards, but we may doubt
whether with this instrument it will ever be possible to establish such a
wide, common mentality as the simpler and swifter alphabets of the western
civilizations permit. In China it created a special reading-class, the
mandarins, who were also the ruling and official class. Their necessary
concentration upon words and classical forms rather than upon ideas and
realities seems, in spite of her comparative peacefulness and the very high
individual intellectual quality of her people, to have greatly hampered the
social and economic development of China. Probably it is the complexity of
her speech and writing, more than any other imaginable cause, that has made
China today politically, socially, and individually a vast pool of backward
people rather than the foremost power in the whole world.\ [#fn2]_

.. [#fn1] See the Encyclopaedia Brit., Article *China*, p. 218.

.. [#fn2] The writer's friend, Mr. L. Y. Chen, thinks that this is only partially true.
    He thinks that the emperors insisted upon a minute and rigorous study of the
    set classics in order to check intellectual innovation. This was especially
    the case with the Ming emperors, the first of whom, when reorganizing the
    examination system on a narrower basis, said definitely, "This will bring all
    the intellectuals of the world into my trap." The Five Classics and the Four
    Books have imprisoned the mind of China.

