
16.2 Syllable Writing
================================================================
But while the Chinese mind thus made for itself an instrument which is
probably too elaborate in structure, too laborious in use, and too inflexible
in its form to meet the modern need for simple, swift, exact, and lucid
communications, the growing civilizations of the west were working out the
problem of a written record upon rather different and, on the whole, more
advantageous lines. They did not seek to improve their script to make it
swift and easy, but circumstances conspired to make it so. The Sumerian
picture writing, which had to be done upon clay and with little styles, which
made curved marks with difficulty and inaccurately, rapidly degenerated by a
conventionalized dabbing down of wedged-shaped marks (cuneiform = wedge-
shaped) into almost unrecognizable hints of the shapes intended. It helped
the Sumerians greatly to learn to write, that they had to draw so badly. They
got very soon to the Chinese pictographs, ideographs, and phonograms, and
beyond them.

Most people know a sort of puzzle called a rebus. It is a way of representing
words by pictures, not of the things the words represent, but by the pictures
of other things having a similar sound. For example, two gates and a head is
a rebus for Gateshead; a little streamlet (beck), a crowned monarch, and a
ham, Beckingham. The Sumerian language was a language well adapted to this
sort of representation. It was apparently a language of often quite vast
polysyllables, made up of very distinct inalterable syllables; and many of
the syllables taken separately were the names of concrete things. So that
this cuneiform writing developed very readily into a syllabic way of writing,
in which each sign conveys a syllable just as each act in a charade conveys a
syllable. When presently the Semites conquered Sumeria, they adapted the
syllabic system to their own speech, and so this writing became entirely a
sign-for-a-sound writing. It was so used by the Assyrians and by the
Chaldeans, but it was not a letter-writing, it was a syllable writing. This
cuneiform script prevailed for long ages over Assyria, Babylonia, and the
Near East generally; there are vestiges of it in some of the letters of our
alphabet today.


