
16.3 Alphabet Writing
================================================================
But, meanwhile, in Egypt and upon the Mediterranean coast yet another system
of writing grew up. Its beginnings are probably to be found in the priestly
picture-writing (hieroglyphics) of the Egyptians, which also in the usual way
became partly a sound-sign sign system. As we see it on the Egyptian
monuments, the hieroglyphic writing consists of decorative but stiff and
elaborate forms, but for such purpose as letter-writing and the keeping of
recipes and the like, the Egyptian priests used a much simplified and flowing
form of these characters, the *hieratic script.* Side by side with this
hieratic script rose another, probably also derivative from the hieroglyphs,
a script now lost to use, which was taken over by various non-Egyptian
peoples in the Mediterranean, the Phoenicians, Libyans, Lydians, Cretans, and
Celt-Iberians, and used for business purposes. Possibly a few letters were
borrowed from the later cuneiform. In the hands of these foreigners this
writing was, so to speak, cut off from its roots; it lost all but a few
traces of its early pictorial, character. It ceased to be pictographic or
ideographic; it became simply a pure sound-sign system, an *alphabet.*

There were a number of such alphabets in the Mediterranean differing widely
from each other. It may be noted that the Phoenician alphabet (and perhaps
others) omitted vowels. Possibly they pronounced their consonants very hard
and had rather indeterminate vowels, as is said to be still the case with
tribes of South Arabia. Quite probably, too, the Phoenicians used their
alphabet at first not so much for writing as for single initial letters in
their business accounts and tallies. One of these Mediterranean alphabets
reached the Greeks, long after the time of the Iliad, who presently set to
work to make it express the clear and beautiful sounds of their own highly
developed Aryan speech. It consisted at first of consonants, and the Greeks
added the vowels. They began to write for record, to help and fix their
bardic tradition....

