
16.4 The Place of Writing in Human Life
================================================================
So it was by a series of very natural steps that writing grew out of the life
of man. At first and for long ages it was the interest and the secret of only
a few people in a special class, a mere accessory to the record of pictures.
But there were certain very manifest advantages, quite apart from the
increased expressiveness of mood and qualification, to be gained by making
writing a little less plain than straightforward pictures, and in
conventionalizing and codifying it. One of these was that so messages might
be sent understandable by the sender and receiver, but not plain to the
uninitiated. Another was that so one might put down various matters and help
one's memory and the memory of one's friends, without giving away too much to
the common herd. Among some of the earliest Egyptian writings, for example,
are medical recipes and magic formulae. Accounts, letters, recipes, name
lists, itineraries; these were the earliest of written documents. Then, as
the art of writing and reading spread, came that odd desire, that pathetic
desire so common among human beings, to astonish some strange and remote
person by writing down something striking, some secret one knew, some strange
thought, or even one's name, so that long after one had gone one's way, it
might strike upon the sight and mind of another reader. Even in Sumeria men
scratched on walls, and all that remains to us of the ancient world, its
rocks, its buildings, is plastered thickly with the names and the boasting of
those foremost among human advertisers, its kings. Perhaps half the early
inscriptions in that ancient world are of this nature, if, that is, we group
with the name-writing and boasting the epitaphs, which were probably in many
cases pro-arranged by the deceased.

For long the desire for crude self-assertion of the name scrawling sort and
the love of secret understandings kept writing within a narrow scope; but
that other, more truly social desire in men, the desire to tell, was also at
work. The pro-founder possibilities of writing, the possibilities of a vast
extension and definition and settlement of knowledge and tradition, only grew
apparent after long ages. But it will be interesting at this point and in
this connection to recapitulate certain elemental facts about life, upon
which we laid stress in our earlier chapters, because they illuminate not
only the huge value of writing in the whole field of man's history, but also
the role it is likely to play in his future.

1. Life had at first, it must be remembered, only a discontinuous
    repetition of consciousness, as the old died and the young were born.

Such a creature as a reptile has in its brain a capacity for experience, but
when the individual dies, its experience dies with it. Most of its motives
are purely instinctive, and all the mental life that it has is the result of
heredity (birth inheritance).

2. But ordinary mammals have added to pure instinct *tradition,* a
    tradition of experience imparted by the imitated example of the mother,
    and in the case of such mentally developed animals as dogs, cats, or
    apes, by a sort of mute precept also. For example, the mother cat
    chastises her young for misbehaviour. So do mother apes and baboons.

3. Primitive man added to his powers of transmitting experience,
    representative art and speech. Pictorial and sculptured record and
    *verbal tradition* began.

Verbal tradition was developed to its highest possibility by the bards. They
did much to make language what it is to the world today.

4. With the invention of writing, which developed out of pictorial
    record, human tradition was able to become fuller and much more exact.
    Verbal tradition, which had hitherto changed from age to age, began to be
    fixed. Men separated by hundreds of miles could now communicate their
    thoughts. An increasing number of human beings began to share a common
    written knowledge and a common sense of a past and a future. Human
    thinking became a larger operation in which hundreds of minds in
    different places and in different ages could react upon one another; it
    became a process constantly more continuous and sustained....

5. For hundreds of generations the full power of writing was not revealed
    to the world, because for a long time the idea of multiplying writings by
    taking prints of a first copy did not become effective. The only way of
    multiplying writings was by copying one copy at a time, and this made
    books costly and rare. Moreover, the tendency to keep things secret, to
    make a cult and mystery of them, and so to gain an advantage over the
    generality of men, has always been very strong in men's minds. It is only
    nowadays that the great masses of mankind are learning to read, and
    reaching out towards the treasures of knowledge and thought already
    stored in books.

Nevertheless, from the first writings onward a new sort of tradition, an
enduring and immortal tradition, began in the minds of men. Life, through
mankind, grew thereafter more and more distinctly conscious of itself and its
world. It is a thin streak of intellectual growth we trace in history, at
first in a world of tumultuous ignorance and forgetfulness; it is like a mere
line of light coming through the chink of an opening door into a darkened
room; but slowly it widens, it grows. At last came a time in the history of
Europe when the door, at the push of the printer, began to open more rapidly.
Knowledge flared up, and as it flared it ceased to be the privilege of a
favoured minority. For us now that door swings wider, and the light behind
grows brighter. Misty it is still, glowing through clouds of dust and reek.

The door is not half open; the light is but a light new lit. Our world today
is only in the beginning of knowledge.

