28.1 A Short Catalogue of Emperors
========================================================================
.. _Figure 453:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0453.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0453.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 453

    Figure 453: Map — Roman Empire in the time of Trajan

Western writers are apt, through their patriotic predispositions,
to overestimate the organization, civilizing work, and security of the absolute
monarchy that established itself in Rome after the accession of Augustus
Caesar. From it we derive the political traditions of Britain, France, Spain,
Germany, and Italy, and these countries loom big in the perspectives of
European writers. By the scale of a world history the Roman Empire ceases to
seem so overwhelmingly important. It lasted about four centuries in all before
it was completely shattered. The Byzantine Empire was no genuine continuation
of it; it was a resumption of the Hellenic Empire of Alexander; it spoke Greek;
its monarch had a Roman title no doubt, but so for that matter had the late
Tsar of Bulgaria. During its four centuries of life the empire of Rome had
phases of division and complete chaos; its prosperous years, if they are
gathered together and added up, do not amount in all to a couple of centuries.
Compared with the quiet steady expansion, the security, and the civilizing task
of the contemporary Chinese Empire, or with Egypt between 4000 and 1000 B.C.,
or with Sumeria before the Semitic conquest, this amounts to a mere incident in
history. The Persian Empire of Cyrus again, which reached from the Hellespont
to the Indus, had as high a standard of civilization; and its homelands
remained unconquered and fairly prosperous for over two hundred years. Its
predecessor, the Median Empire, had endured for half a century. After a brief
submergence by Alexander the Great, it rose again as the Seleucid Empire, which
endured for some centuries. The Seleucid dominion shrank at last to the west of
the Euphrates, and became a part of the Roman Empire; but Persia, revived by
the Parthians as a new Persian Empire, first under the Arsacids and then under
the Sassanids, outlived the empire of Rome. The Sassanids repeatedly carried
war into the Byzantine Empire, and held the line of the Euphrates steadfastly.
In 616 A.D. under Chosroes II, they were holding Damascus, Jerusalem, and
Egypt, and threatening the Hellespont. But there has been no tradition to keep
alive the glories of the Sassanids. The reputation of Rome has flourished
through the prosperity of her heirs. The tradition of Rome is greater than its
reality.

History distinguishes two chief groups of Roman emperors
who were great administrators. The first of these groups began with:

Augustus Caesar (27 B.C. to 14 A.D.), the Octavian of the
previous section, who worked hard at the reorganization of the provincial
governments and at financial reform. He established a certain tradition of
lawfulness and honesty in the bureaucracy, and he restrained the more monstrous
corruptions and tyrannies by giving the provincial citizen the right to appeal
to Caesar. But he fixed the European boundaries of the empire along the Rhine
and Danube, so leaving Germany, which is the necessary backbone of a safe and
prosperous Europe, to barbarism; and he made a similar limitation in the east
at the Euphrates, leaving Armenia independent, to be a constant bone of
contention with the Arsacids. and Sassanids. It is doubtful whether he
considered that he was fixing the final boundaries of the empire along these
lines, or whether he thought it desirable to consolidate for some years before
any further attempts at expansion.

Tiberius (14 to 37 A.D.) is also described as a capable
ruler, but he became intensely unpopular in Rome, and it would seem that he was
addicted to gross and abominable vices. But his indulgence in these and his
personal tyrannies and cruelties did not interfere with the general prosperity
of the empire. It is difficult to judge him; nearly all our sources of
information are manifestly hostile to him.

Caligula (37 to 41 A.D.) was insane, but the empire carried
on during four years of eccentricity at its head. Finally he was murdered in
his palace by his servants, and there seems to have been an attempt to restore
the senatorial government, an attempt which was promptly suppressed by the
household legions.

Claudius (41 to 54 A.D.), the uncle of Caligula, upon whom the
choice of the soldiers fell, was personally uncouth, but he seems to have been
a hardworking and fairly capable administrator. He advanced the westward
boundary of the empire by annexing the southern half of Britain. He was
poisoned by Agrippina, the mother of his adopted son, Nero, and a woman of
great charm and force of character.

Nero (54 to 68 A.D.), like Tiberius, is credited with
monstrous vices and cruelties, but the empire had acquired sufficient momentum
to carry on through his fourteen years of power. He certainly murdered his
devoted but troublesome mother and his wife, the latter as a mark of devotion
to a lady, Poppaea, who then married him; but the domestic infelicities of the
Caesars are no part of our present story. The reader greedy for criminal
particulars must go to the classical source, Suetonius. These various Caesars
and their successors and their womenkind were probably no worse essentially
than most weak and passionate human beings, but they had no real religion being
themselves gods; they had no wide knowledge on which to build high ambitions,
their women were fierce and often illiterate, and they were under no restraints
of law or custom. They were surrounded by creatures ready to stimulate their
slightest wishes and to translate their vaguest impulses into action. What are
mere passing black thoughts and angry impulses with most of us became therefore
deeds with them. Before a man condemns Nero as a different species of being
from himself, he should examine his own secret thoughts very carefully. Nero
became intensely unpopular in Rome, and it is interesting to note that he
became unpopular not because he murdered and poisoned his intimate relations,
but because there was an insurrection in Britain under a certain Queen
Boadicea, and the Roman forces suffered a great disaster (61 A.D.), and because
there was a destructive earthquake in Southern Italy. The Roman population,
true to its Etruscan streak, never religious and always superstitious, did not
mind a wicked Caesar, but it did object strongly to an unpropitious one. The
Spanish legions rose in insurrection under an elderly general of seventy-three,
Galba, whom they acclaimed emperor. He advanced upon Rome carried in a litter.
Nero, hopeless of support, committed suicide. (68 A.D.).

Galba, however, was only one of a group of would-be
emperors. The generals in command of the Rhine legions, the Palatine troops,
and the eastern armies, each attempted to seize power. Rome saw four emperors
in a year, Galba, Otho, Vitellus, and Vespasian; the fourth, Vespasian (69-79
A.D.), from the eastern command, had the firmest grip, and held and kept the
prize. But with Nero the line of Caesars born or adopted ended. Caesar ceased
to be the family name of the Roman emperors and became a title, Divus Caesar,
the Caesar god. The monarchy took a step forward towards orientalism by an
increased insistence upon the worship of the ruler.

Vespasian (69 to 79 A.D.) and his sons Titus (79 A.D.) and
Domitian (81 A.D.) constitute, as it were, a second dynasty, the Flavian; then
after the assassination of Domitian came a group of emperors related to one
another not by blood, but by adoption, the adoptive emperors. Nerva (96 A.D.)
was the first of this line, and Trajan (98 A.D.) the second. They were followed
by the indefatigable Hadrian (117 A.D.), Antoninus Pius (138 A.D.), and Marcus
Aurelius (161 to 180 A.D.). Under both the Flavians and the Antonines the
boundaries of the empire crept forward again. North Britain was annexed in 84
A.D., the angle of the Rhine and Danube was filled in, and what is now
Transylvania was made into a new province, Dacia Trajan also invaded Parthia
and annexed Armenia, Assyria, and Mesopotamia. Under his rule the empire
reached its maximum extent. Hadrian, his successor, was of a cautious and
retractile disposition. He abandoned these new eastern conquests of Trajan's,
and he also abandoned North Britain. He adopted the Chinese idea of the
limiting wall against barbarism, an excellent idea so, long as the pressure of
population on the imperial side of the wall is greater than the pressure from
without, but worthless otherwise. He built Hadrian's wall across Britain, and a
palisade between the Rhine and the Danube. The full tide of Roman expansion was
past, and in the reign of his successor the North European frontier was already
actively on the defensive against the aggression of Teutonic and Slavic tribes.

Marcus Aurelius Antoninus is one of those figures in
history about which men differ widely and intensely. To some, critics he seems
to have been a priggish person; he dabbled in religions, and took a pleasure in
conducting priestly ceremonies in priestly garments-a disposition offensive to
common men-and they resent his alleged failure to restrain the wickedness of
his wife Faustina. The stories of his domestic infelicity, however, rest on no
very good foundations, though certainly his son Commodus was a startling person
for a good home to produce. On the other hand, he was unquestionably a devoted
and industrious emperor, holding social order together through a series of
disastrous years of vile weather, great floods, failing harvests and famine,
barbaric raids and revolts, and at last a terrible universal pestilence. Says
F. W. Farrar, quoted in the *Encyclopaedia
Britannica,* «He regarded himself as being, in fact, the servant of all. The
registry of the citizens, the suppression of litigation, the elevation of
public morals, the care of minors, the retrenchment of public expenses, the
limitation of gladiatorial games and shows, the care of roads, the restoration
of senatorial privileges, the appointment of none but worthy magistrates, even
the regulation of street traffic, these and numberless other duties so
completely absorbed his attention that, in spite of indifferent health, they
often kept him at severe labour from early morning till long after midnight.
His position, indeed, often necessitated his presence at games and shows; but
on these occasions be occupied himself either in reading, or being read to, or
in writing notes. He was one of those who held that nothing should be done
hastily, and that few crimes were worse than waste of time».

But it is not by these industries that he is now
remembered. He was one of the greatest exponents of the Stoical philosophy, and
in his *Meditations,* jotted down in
camp and court, he has put so much of a human soul on record as, to raise up
for himself in each generation a fresh series of friends and admirers.

With the death of Marcus Aurelius this phase of unity and
comparatively good government came to an end, and his son Commodus inaugurated
an age of disorder. Practically the empire had been at peace within itself for
two hundred years. Now for a hundred years the student of Roman history must
master the various criminology of a number of inadequate emperors while the
frontier crumbled and receded under barbarian pressure. One or two names only
seem to be the names of able men: such were Septimius Severus, Aurelian, and
Probus. Septimius Severus was a Carthaginian, and his sister was never able to
master Latin. She conducted her Roman household in the Punic language, which
must have made Cato the elder turn in his grave. The rest of the emperors of
this period were chiefly adventurers too unimportant to the general scheme of
things for us to note. At times there were separate emperors ruling in
different parts of the distracted empire. From our present point of view the
Emperor Decius, who was defeated and killed during a great raid of the Goths
into Thrace in 251 A.D., and the Emperor Valerian, who, together with the great
city of Antioch, was captured by the Sassanid Shah of Persia in 260 A.D., are
worthy of notice because they mark the insecurity of the whole Roman system,
and the character of the outer pressure upon it. So, too, is Claudius, «the
Conqueror of the Gotha», because he gained a great victory over these people at
Nish in Serbia (270 A.D.), and because he died, like Pericles, of the plague.

Through all these centuries intermittent pestilences were
playing a part in weakening races and altering social conditions, a part that
has still to be properly worked out by historians. There was, for instance, a
great plague throughout the empire between the years 164 and 180 A.D. in the
reign of the Emperor Marcus Aurelius. It probably did much to disorganize
social life and prepare the way for the troubles that followed the accession of
Commodus. This same pestilence devastated China, as we shall note in sec 4 of
this chapter. Considerable fluctuations of climate had also been going on in the
first and second centuries, producing stresses and shiftings of population,
whose force historians have still to appraise. But before we go on to tell of
the irruptions of the barbarians and the attempts of such later emperors as
Diocletian (284 A.D.) and Constantine the Great (312 A.D.) to hold together the
heaving and splitting vessel of the state, we must describe something of the
conditions of human life in the Roman Empire during its two centuries of
prosperity.
