
28.2 Roman Civilization at its Zenith
========================================================================

The impatient reader of history may be disposed to count
the two centuries of order between 27 B.C. and 180 A.D. as among the wasted
opportunities of mankind. It was an age of spending rather than of creation, an
age of architecture and trade in which the rich grew richer and the poor poorer
and the soul and spirit of man decayed. Looked at superficially, as a man might
have looked at it from an aeroplane a couple of thousand feet in the air, there
was a considerable flourish of prosperity. Everywhere, from York to Cyrene and
from Lisbon to Antioch, he would have noted large and well-built cities, with
temples, theatres, amphitheatres, markets, and the like; thousands of such
cities, supplied by great aqueducts and served by splendid high roads, whose
stately remains astonish us to this day. He would have noted an abundant
cultivation, and have soared too high to discover that this cultivation was the
grudging work of slaves. Upon the Mediterranean and the Rod Sea a considerable
traffic would be visible; and the sight of two ships alongside each other would
not at that altitude reveal the fact that one was a pirate and plundering the
other.

And even if the observer came down to a closer scrutiny,
there would still be much accumulated improvement to note. There had been a
softening of manners and a general refinement since the days of Julius Caesar.
With this there had been a real increase of humane feeling. During the period
of the Antonines, laws for the protection of slaves from extreme cruelty came
into existence, and it was no longer permissible to sell them to the
gladiatorial schools. Not only were the cities outwardly more splendidly built,
but within the homes of the wealthy there had been great advances in the art of
decoration. The gross feasting, animal indulgence, and vulgar display of the
earlier days of Roman prosperity were now tempered by a certain refinement.
Dress had become richer, finer, and more beautiful. There was a great trade in
silk with remote China for the mulberry-tree and the silkworm had not yet begun
to move west. By the time silk had ended its long and varied journey to Rome it
was worth its weight in gold. Yet it was used abundantly, and there was a
steady flow of the precious metals eastward in exchange. There had been very
considerable advances in gastronomy and the arts of entertainment. Petronius
describes a feast given by a wealthy man under the early Caesars, a remarkable
succession of courses, some delicious, some amazing, exceeding anything that
even the splendours and imagination of modern New York could produce; and the
festival was varied by music and by displays of tight-rope dancing, juggling,
Homeric recitations, and the like. There was a considerable amount of what we
may describe as «rich men's culture» throughout the empire. Books were far more
plentiful than they had been before the time of the Caesars. Men prided
themselves upon their libraries, even when the cares and responsibilities of
property made them too busy to give their literary treasures much more than a passing
examination. The knowledge of Greek spread eastward and of Latin westward, and
if the prominent men of this or that British or Gallic city lacked any profound
Greek-culture themselves, they could always turn to some slave or other, whose
learning had been guaranteed of the highest quality by the slave-dealer, to
supply the deficiency.

The generation of Cato had despised Greeks and the Greek
language, but now all that was changed. The prestige of Greek learning of an
approved and settled type was as high in the Rome of Antoninus Pius as it was
in the Oxford and Cambridge of Victorian England. The Greek scholar received
the same mixture of unintelligent deference and practical contempt. There was a
very considerable amount of Greek scholarship, and of written criticism and
commentary. Indeed there was so great an admiration for Greek letters as almost
completely to destroy the Greek spirit; and the recorded observations of
Aristotle were valued so highly as to preclude any attempt to imitate his
organization of further inquiry. It is noteworthy that while Aristotle in the
original Greek fell like seed upon stony soil in the Roman world, he was, in
Syrian and Arabic translations, immensely stimulating to the Arabic
civilization of a thousand years later. Nor were the aesthetic claims of Latin
neglected in this heyday of Greek erudition. As Greece had her epics and so
forth, the Romans felt that they, too, must have their epics. The age of
Augustus was an age of imitative literature. Virgil in the 
*Aeneid* set himself modestly but resolutely, and with an elegant
sort of successfulness, to parallel the *Odyssey*
and *Iliad*.

All this wide-spread culture of the wealthy householder is
to the credit of the early Roman Empire, and Gibbon makes the most of it in the
sunny review of the age of the Antonines, with which he opens his 
*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire.*
His design for that great work demanded a prelude of splendour and
tranquillity. But he was far too shrewd and subtle not to qualify his apparent
approval of the conditions he describes. «Under the Roman Empire», he writes,
«the labour of an industrious and ingenious people was variously but
incessantly employed in the service of the rich. In their dress, their table,
their houses, and their furniture, the favourites of fortune united every
refinement of convenience, of elegance, and of splendour, whatever could soothe
their, pride, or gratify their sensuality. Such refinements, under the odious
name of luxury, have been severely arraigned by the moralists of every age; and
it might perhaps be more conducive to the virtue, as well as happiness, of
mankind, if all possessed the necessaries, and none the superfluities of life.
But in the present imperfect condition of society, luxury, though it may
proceed from vice or folly, seems to be the only means that can correct the
unequal distribution of property. The diligent mechanic and the skilful artist,
who have obtained no share in the division of the earth, receive a voluntary
tax from the possessors of land; and the latter are, prompted, by a sense of
interest, to improve those estates, with whose produce they may purchase
additional pleasure. This operation, the particular effects of which are felt
in every society, acted with much more diffuse energy in the Roman world. The
provinces would soon have been exhausted of their wealth, if the manufactures
and commerce of luxury had not insensibly restored to the industrious subjects
the sums which were exacted from them by the arms and authority of Rome». And
so on, with a sting of satire in every fold of the florid description.

If to look a little more widely than a hovering aeroplane
can do at the movement of races upon the earth, or a little more closely than
an inspection of streets, amphitheatres, and banquets goes into the souls and
thoughts of men, we shall find that this impressive display of material
prosperity is merely the shining garment of a polity blind to things without
and things within, and blind to the future. If, for instance, we compare the
two centuries of Roman ascendancy and opportunity, the first and second
centuries A.D., with the two centuries of Greek and Hellenic life beginning
about 466 B.C. with the supremacy of Pericles in Athens, we are amazed by we
cannot call it an inferiority, it is a complete absence of science. The
incuriousness of the Roman rich and the Roman rulers was more massive and
monumental even than their architecture.

In one field of knowledge particularly we might have
expected the Romans to have been alert and enterprising, and that was
geography. Their political interests demanded a steadfast inquiry into the
state of affairs beyond their frontiers, and yet that inquiry was never made.
There is practically no literature of Roman travel beyond the imperial limits,
no such keen and curious accounts as Herodotus gives of the Scythians, the
Africans, and the like, There is nothing in Latin to compare with the early
descriptions of India and Siberia, that are to be found in Chinese. The Roman
legions went at one time into Scotland, yet there remains no really intelligent
account of Picts or Scots, much less any glance at the seas beyond. Such
explorations as those of Hanno or Pharaoh Necho, seem to have been altogether
beyond the scope of the Roman imagination. It is probable that after the
destruction of Carthage the amount of shipping that went out into the Atlantic
through the Straits of Gibraltar fell to inconsiderable, proportions. Still
more impossible in this world of vulgar wealth, enslaved intelligence, and
bureaucratic rule was any further development of the astronomy and physiography
of Alexandria. The Romans do not seem even to have inquired what manner of men
wove the silk and prepared the spices or collected the amber and the pearls
that came into their markets. Yet the channels of inquiry were open and easy;
pathways led in every direction to the most convenient «jumping-off places» for
explorers it is possible to imagine.

«The most remote countries of the ancient world were
ransacked to supply the pomp and delicacy of Rome. The forests of Scythia
afforded some valuable furs. Amber was brought overland from the shores of the
Baltic to the Danube, and the barbarians were astonished at the price which
they received in exchange for so useless a commodity. There was a considerable
demand for Babylonian carpets and other manufactures of the East; but the most
important branch of foreign trade was carried on with Arabia and India. Every
year, about the time of the summer solstice, a fleet of a hundred and twenty
vessels sailed from Myos-hormos, a port of Egypt on the Red Sea. By the
periodical assistance of the monsoons, they traversed the ocean in about forty
days. The coast of Malabar, or the island of Ceylon, was the usual term of
their navigation, and it was in those markets that the merchants from the more
remote countries of Asia expected their arrival. The return of the fleet to
Egypt was fixed to the months of December or January, and as soon as their rich
cargo had been transported, on the backs of camels, from the Red Sea to the
Nile, and had descended that river as far as Alexandria, it was poured, without
delay, into the capital of the empire».\ [#fn1]_ 

Yet Rome was content to feast, exact, grow rich, and watch
its gladiatorial shows without the slightest attempt to learn anything of
India, China, Persia or Scythia, Buddha or Zoroaster, or about the Huns, the
Negroes, the people of Scandinavia, or the secrets of the western sea.

When we realize the uninspiring quality of the social
atmosphere which made this indifference possible, we are able to account for
the failure of Rome during its age of opportunity to develop any physical or
chemical science, and as a consequence to gain any increased control over
matter. Most of the physicians in Rome were Greeks and many of them slaves-for
the Roman wealthy did not even understand that a bought mind is a spoilt mind.
Yet this was not due to any want of natural genius among the Roman people; it
was due entirely to their social and economic conditions. From the Middle Ages
to the present day Italy has produced a great number of brilliant scientific
men. And one of the most shrewd and inspired of scientific writers was an
Italian, Lucretius, who lived between the time of Marius and Julius Caesar
(about 100 B.C. to about 55 B.C.). This amazing man was of the quality of
Leonardo da Vinci (also an Italian) or Newton. He wrote a long Latin poem about
the processes of Nature, *De Rerum
Naluria,* in which he guessed with astonishing insight about the
constitution of matter and about the early history of mankind. Osborn in his 
*Old Stone Age* quotes with admiration
long passages from Lucretius about primitive man, so good and true are they
today. But this was an individual display, a seed that bore no fruit. Roman
science was stillborn into a suffocating atmosphere of vile wealth and military
oppression. The true figure to represent the classical Roman attitude to
science is not, Lucretius, but that Roman soldier who hacked Archimedes to
death at the storming of Syracuse.

And if physical and biological science wilted and died on
the stony soil of Roman prosperity, political and social science never had a
chance to germinate. Political discussion would have been treason to the
emperor, social or economic, inquiry would have threatened the rich. So Rome,
until disaster fell upon her, never examined into her own social health, never
questioned the ultimate value of her hard officialism. Consequently, there was
no one who realized the gravity of her failure to develop any intellectual
imagination to hold her empire together, any general education in common ideas
that would make men fight and work for the empire as men will fight and work
for a dear possession. But the rulers of the Roman Empire did not want their
citizens to fight for anything in any spirit at all. The rich had eaten the
heart out of their general population, and they were content with the meal they
had made. The legions were filled with Germans, Britons, Numidians, and the
like; and until the very end the wealthy Romans thought they could go on buying
barbarians to defend them against the enemy without and the rebel poor within.
How little was done in education by the Romans is shown 'by an account of what
was done. Says Mr. H. Stuart Jones, «Julius Caesar bestowed Roman citizenship
on 'teachers of the liberal arts'; Vespasian endowed professorships of Greek
and Latin oratory at Rome; and later emperors, especially Antoninus Pius,
extended the same benefits to the provinces. Local enterprise and munificence
were also devoted to the cause of education; we learn from the correspondence
of the younger Pliny that public schools were founded in the towns of Northern
Italy. But though there was a wide diffusion of knowledge under the empire,
there was no true intellectual progress. Augustus, it is true, gathered about
him the most brilliant writers of his time, and the debut of the new Monarchy
coincided with the Golden Age of Roman literature; but this was of brief
duration, and the beginnings of the Christian era saw the triumph of classicism
and the first steps in the decline which awaits all literary movements which
look to the past rather than the future».

There is a diagnosis of the intellectual decadence of the
age in a treatise upon the sublime by a Greek writer who, wrote somewhere in
the second, third, or fourth century A.D., and who may possibly have been
Longinus Philologus, which states very distinctly one manifest factor in the
mental *sickness of* the Roman world.
He is cited by Gibbon: «The sublime Longinus, who, in somewhat a later period
and in the court of a Syrian queen, Zenobia, preserved the spirit of ancient
Athens, observes and laments the degeneracy of his contemporaries, which
debased their sentiments, enervated their courage, and depressed their talents.
'In the same manner,' says be, 'as some children always remain pigmies, whose
infant limbs have been too closely confined, thus our tender minds; fettered by
the prejudices and habits of a just servitude, are unable to expand themselves
or to attain that well-proportioned greatness which we admire in the ancients,
who, living under a popular government, wrote with all the same freedom as they
acted.' «

But this critic grasped only one aspect of the restraints
upon mental activity. The leading-strings that kept the Roman mind in a permanent
state of infantilism constituted a double servitude; they were economic as well
as political, The account Gibbon gives of the life and activities of a certain
Herodes, Atticus, who lived in the time of Hadrian, shows: just how little was
the share of the ordinary citizen in the outward magnificence of the time. This
Atticus had an immense fortune, and he amused himself by huge architectural
benefactions to various cities. Athens was given a racecourse, and a theatre of
cedar, curiously carved, was set up there to the memory of his wife; a theatre
was built at Corinth, a racecourse was given to Delphi, baths to Thermopylae,
an aqueduct to Canusium, and so on and so on. One is struck by the spectacle of
a world of slaves and common people who were not consulted and over whose
heads, without any participation on their part, this rich man indulged in his
displays of «taste». Numerous inscriptions in Greece and Asia still preserve
the name of Herodes Atticus, «patron and benefactor», who ranged about the
empire as though it was his private garden, commemorating himself by these
embellishments. He did not confine himself to splendid buildings. He was also a
philosopher, though none of his wisdom has survived. He had a large villa near
Athens, and there philosophers were welcome guests so long as they convinced
their patron of the soundness of their pretensions, received his discourses
with respect, and did not offend him by insolent controversy.

The world, it is evident, was not progressing during these
two centuries of Roman prosperity. But was it happy in its stagnation? There
are signs of a very unmistakable sort that the great mass of human beings in
the empire, a mass numbering something between a hundred and a hundred and
fifty millions, was not happy, was probably very acutely miserable, beneath its
outward magnificence. True there were no great wars and conquests within the
empire, little of famine or fire or sword to afflict mankind; but, on the other
hand, there was a terrible restraint by government, and still more by the
property of the rich, upon the free activities of nearly everyone. Life for the
great majority who were neither rich nor official, nor the womankind and the
parasites of the rich and official, must have been laborious, tedious, and
lacking in interest and freedom to a degree that a modern mind can scarcely
imagine.

Three things in particular may be cited to sustain the
opinion that this period was a period of widespread unhappiness. The first of
these is the extraordinary apathy of the population to political events. They
saw one upstart pretender to empire succeed another with complete indifference.
Such things did not seem to matter to them; hope had gone. When presently the
barbarians poured into the empire, there was nothing but the legions to face
them. There was no popular uprising against them at all. Everywhere the
barbarians must have been out numbered if only the people had resisted. But the
people did not resist. It is manifest that to the bulk of its inhabitants the
Roman Empire did not seem to be a thing worth fighting for. To the slaves and
common people the barbarian probably seemed to promise more freedom and less
indignity than the pompous rule of the imperial official and grinding
employment by the rich. The looting and burning of palaces and an occasional
massacre did not shock the folk of the Roman underworld as it shocked the
wealthy and cultured people to whom we owe such accounts as we have of the
breaking down of the imperial, system. Great numbers of slaves and common
people probably joined the barbarians, who knew little of racial or patriotic prejudices,
and were open-handed to any promising recruit. No doubt in many cases the
population found that the barbarian was a worse infliction even than the
tax-gatherer and the slave driver. But that discovery came too late for
resistance or the restoration of the old order.

And as a second symptom that points to the same conclusion
that life was hardly worth living for the poor and the slaves and the majority
of people during the age of the Antonines, we must reckon the steady
depopulation of the empire. People refused to have children. They did so, we
suggest, because their homes were not safe from oppression, because in the case
of slaves there was no security that the husband and wife would not be
separated, because there was no pride nor reasonable hope in children any more.
In modern states the great breeding-ground has always been the agricultural
countryside where there is a more or less secure peasantry; but under the Roman
Empire the peasant and the small cultivator was either a worried debtor, or he
was held in a network of restraints that made him a spiritless serf, or he had
been ousted altogether by the gang production of slaves.

A third indication that this outwardly flourishing period
was one of deep unhappiness and mental distress, for vast multitudes, is to be
found in the spread of new religious movements throughout the population. We
have seen how in the case of the little country of Judea a whole nation may be
infected by the persuasion that life is unsatisfactory and wrong, and that
something is needed to set it right. The mind of the Jews, as we know, had
crystallized about the idea of the Promise of the One True God and the coming
of a Saviour or Messiah. Rather different ideas from these were spreading
through the Roman Empire. They were but varying answers to one universal
question: «What must we do for salvation?» A frequent and natural consequence
of disgust with life as it is, is to throw the imagination forward to an
after-life, which is to redeem all the miseries and injustices of this one. The
belief in such compensation is a great opiate for present miseries. Egyptian
religion had long been saturated with anticipations of immortality, and we have
seen how central was that idea to the cult of Serapis and Isis at Alexandria.
The ancient mysteries of Demeter and Orpheus, the mysteries of the
Mediterranean race, revived and made a sort of 
*theocrasia,* with these new cults.

A second great religious movement was Mithraism, a
development of Zoroastrianism, a religion of very ancient Aryan origin,
traceable back to the Indo-Iranian people before they split into Persians and
Hindus. We cannot here examine its mysteries in any detail.\ [#fn2]_  Mithras was a
god of light, a Sun of Righteousness, and in the shrines of the cult he was
always represented as slaying a sacred bull whose blood was the seed of life.
Suffice it that, complicated with many added ingredients, this worship of
Mithras came into the Roman Empire about the time of Pompey the Great, and
began to spread very widely under the Caesars and Antonines. Like the Isis
religion, it promised immortality. Its followers were mainly slaves, soldiers,
and distressed people. In its methods of worship, in the burning of candles
before the altar and so forth, it had a certain superficial resemblance to the
later developments of the ritual of the third great religious movement in the
Roman world, Christianity.

Christianity also was a doctrine of immortality and salvation,
and it, too, spread at first chiefly among the lowly and unhappy. Christianity
has been denounced by modern writers as a «slave religion». It was. It took the
slaves and the downtrodden, and it gave them hope and restored their
self-respect, so that they stood up for righteousness like men and faced
persecution and torment. But of the origins and quality of Christianity we will
tell more fully in a later chapter.

.. [#fn1] Gibbon.
.. [#fn2] See Legge, :t:`Forerunners and Rivals of Christianity`
