
28.4 The Stir of the Great Plains
========================================================================
.. _Figure 471:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0471.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0471.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 471

    Figure 471: Map of Asia, with Europe

    Map of Asia (with Europe) to illustrate the general conditions of life during the Historical Period.

And now it is necessary, if we are to understand clearly
the true situation of the Roman Empire, to turn our eyes to the world beyond
its northern and eastern borders, the world of the plains, that stretches, with
scarcely a break, from Holland across Germany and Russia to the mountains of
Central Asia and Mongolia, and to give a little attention to the parallel
empire in China that was now consolidating and developing a far tougher and
more enduring moral and intellectual unity, than the Romans ever achieved.

«It is the practice», says Mr. E. H. Parker, 

    «even amongst
    our most highly educated men in Europe, to deliver sonorous sentences about
    being 'masters of the world,' 'bringing all nations of the earth under her
    sway,' and so on, when in reality only some corner of the Mediterranean is
    involved, or some ephemeral sally into Persia and Gaul. Cyrus and Alexander,
    Darius and Xerxes, Caesar and Pompey, all made very interesting excursions, but
    they were certainly not on a larger scale or charged with greater human
    interest than the campaigns which were going on at the other end of Asia.
    Western civilization possessed much in art and science for which China never
    cared, but, on the other hand, the Chinese developed a historical and critical
    literature, a courtesy of demeanour, a luxury of clothing, and an administrative
    system of which Europe might have been proud. In one word, the history of the
    Far East is quite as interesting as that of the Far West. It only requires to
    be able to read it. When we brush away contemptuously from our notice the
    tremendous events which took place on the plains of Tartary, we must not blame
    the Chinese too much for declining to interest themselves in the doings of what
    to them appear insignificant states dotted round the Mediterranean and Caspian,
    which, at this time, was practically all the world of which we knew in Europe».\ [#fn3]_

We have already mentioned (in Chap. XIV and elsewhere) the
name of Shi Hwang-ti, who consolidated an empire much smaller, indeed, than the
present limits of China, but still very great and populous, spreading from the
valleys of the Hwang-ho and the Yang-tse. He became king of Ch'in in 246 B.C.
and emperor in 220 B.C., and he reigned until 210 B.C., and during this third
of a century he effected much the same work of consolidation that Augustus
Caesar carried out in Rome two centuries later. At his death there was dynastic
trouble for four years, and then (206 B.C.) a fresh dynasty, the Han,
established itself and ruled for two hundred and twenty-nine years. The opening
quarter century of the Christian era was troubled by a usurper; then what is
called the Later Han Dynasty recovered power and ruled for another century and
a half until China, in the time of the Antonines, was so devastated by an
eleven-year pestilence as to fall into disorder. This same pestilence, we may
note, also helped to produce a century of confusion in the Western world (see
sec 1).

But altogether until this happened, for more than four
hundred years Central China was generally at peace, and on the whole well
governed, a cycle of strength and prosperity unparalleled by anything in the
experience of the Western world.

Only the first of the Han monarchs continued the policy of
Shi Hwang-ti against the literati. His successor restored the classics, for the
old separatist tradition was broken, and in the uniformity of learning
throughout the empire lay, he saw, the cement of Chinese unity. While the Roman
world was still blind to the need of any universal mental organization, the Han
emperors were setting up a uniform system of education and of literary degrees
throughout China that has maintained the intellectual solidarity of that great
and always expanding country into modern times. The bureaucrats of Rome were of
the most miscellaneous origins and traditions; the bureaucrats of China were,
and are still, made in the same mould, all members of one tradition. Since the
Han days China has experienced great vicissitudes of political fortune, but
they have never changed her fundamental character; she has been divided, but
she has always recovered her unity; she has been conquered, and she has always
absorbed and assimilated her conquerors.

But from our present point of view, the most important
consequences of this consolidation of China under Shi Hwang-ti and the Hans was
in its reaction upon the unsettled tribes of the northern and western border of
China. Throughout the disordered centuries before the time of Shi Hwang-ti, the
Hiung-nu or Huns had occupied Mongolia and large portions of Northern China,
and had raided freely into China and interfered freely in Chinese politics. The
new power and organization of the Chinese civilization began to change this
state of affairs for good and all.

We have already, in our first account of Chinese
beginnings, noted the existence of these Huns. It is necessary now to explain
briefly who and what they were. Even in using this word Hun as a general
equivalent for the Hiung-nu, we step on to controversial ground. In our
accounts of the development of the Western world we have had occasion to name
the Scythians, and to explain the difficulty of distinguishing clearly between
Cimmerians, Sarmatians, Medes, Persians, Parthians, Goths, and other more or
less nomadic, more or less Aryan peoples who drifted to and fro in a great area
between the Danube and Central Asia. While sections of the Aryans were moving
south and acquiring and developing civilization, these other Aryan peoples were
developing mobility and nomadism; they were learning the life of the tent, the
wagon, and the herd. They were learning also to use milk as a food basis, and
were probably becoming less agricultural, less disposed to take even snatch
crops, than they had been. Their development was being aided by a slow change
in climate that was replacing the swamps and forests and parklands of South
Russia and Central Asia by steppes, by wide grazing lands that is, which
favoured a healthy, unsettled life, and necessitated an annual movement between
summer and winter pasture. These peoples had only the lowest political forms;
they split up, they mingled together; the various races had identical social
habits; and so it is that the difficulty, the impossibility of sharp
distinctions between them arises. Now the case of the Mongolian races to the
north and north-west of the Chinese civilization is very parallel. There can be
little doubt that the Hiung-nu, the Huns, and the later people called the
Mongols, were all very much the same people, and that the Turks and Tartars
presently branched off from this same drifting Mongolian population. Kalmucks
and Buriats are later developments of the same strain. Here we shall favour the
use of the word «Hun» as a sort of general term for these tribes, just as we
have been free and wide in our use of «Scythian» in the West.

The consolidation of China was a very serious matter for
these Hunnish peoples. Hitherto their overflow of population had gone
adventuring southward into the disorders of divided China as water goes into a
sponge. Now they found a wall built against them, a firm government, and
disciplined armies cutting them off from the grass plains. And though the wall
held them back, it did not bold back the Chinese. They were increasing and
multiplying through these centuries of peace, and as they increased and
multiplied, they spread steadily with house and plough wherever the soil
permitted. They spread westward into Tibet and northward and north-westwardly,
perhaps, to the edge of the Gobi desert. They spread into the homes and
pasturing and hunting grounds of the Hunnish nomads, exactly as the white
people of the United States spread westward into the hunting grounds of the Red
Indians. And in spite of raid and massacre, they were just as invincible
because they had the pressure of numbers and a strong avenging government
behind them. Even without the latter support the cultivating civilization of
China has enormous powers of permeation and extension. It has spread slowly and
continuously for three thousand years. It is spreading in Manchuria and Siberia
today. It roots deeply where it spreads.

Partly the Huns were civilized and assimilated by the
Chinese. The more northerly Huns were checked and their superabundant energies
were turned westward. The southern Huns were merged into the imperial
population.

If the reader will examine the map of Central Asia, he will
see that very great mountain barriers separate the Southern, Western, and
Eastern peoples of Asia. (But he should be wary of forming his ideas from a map
upon Mercator's projection, which enormously exaggerates the areas and
distances of Northern Asia and Siberia.) He will find that from the central
mountain masses three great mountain systems radiate eastward; the Himalayas
going south-eastward, south of Tibet, the Kuen Lun eastward, north of Tibet,
and the Thien Shan north-eastward to join the Altai mountains. Further to the
north is the great plain, still steadily thawing and drying. Between the Thien
Shan and the Kuen Lun is an area, the Tarim Basin (= roughly Eastern
Turkestan), of rivers that never reach the sea, but end in swamps and
intermittent lakes. This basin was much more fertile in the past than it is
now. The mountain barrier to the west of this Tarim Basin is high, but not
forbidding; there are many practicable routes downward into Western Turkestan,
and it is possible to travel either along the northern foothills of the Kuen
Lun or by the Tarim valley westward from China to Kashgar (where the roads
converge), and so over the mountains to Kokand, Samarkand, and Bokhara. Here
then is the natural meeting-place in history of Aryan and Mongolian. Here or
round by the sea.

We have already noted how Alexander the Great came to one
side of the barrier in 329 B.C. High among the mountains of Turkestan a lake
preserves his name. Indeed, so living is the tradition of his great raid, that
almost any stone ruin in Central Asia is still ascribed to «Iskander». After
this brief glimpse, the light of history upon this region fades again, and when
it becomes bright once more it is on the eastern and not upon the western side.
Far away to the east Shi Hwang-ti had routed the Huns and walled them out of
China proper. A portion of these people remained in the north of China, a
remnant which was destined to amalgamate with Chinese life, under the Hans, but
a considerable section had turned westward and (second and first centuries
B.C.) driven before them a kindred people called the Yueh-Chi, driving them
from the eastern to the western extremity of the Kuen Lun, and at last right
over the barrier into the once Aryan -region of Western Turkestan.\ [#fn4]_  These
Yueh-Chi conquered the slightly Hellenized kingdom of Bactria, and mixed with
Aryan people there. Later on these Yueh-Chi became or were merged with Aryan
elements into a people called the Indo-Scythians, who went on down the Khyber
Pass and conquered northern portions of India as far as Benares (100-150 A.D.),
wiping out the last vestiges of Hellenic rule in India. This big splash over of
the Mongolian races westward was probably not the first of such splashes, but
it is the first recorded splash. In the rear of the Yueh-Chi were the Huns, and
in the rear of the Huns and turning them now northward was the vigorous Han
Dynasty of China. In the reign of the greatest of the Han monarchs, Wu-Ti
(140-86 B.C.), the Huns had been driven northward out of the whole of Eastern Turkestan
or subjugated, the Tarim Basin swarmed with Chinese settlers, and caravans were
going over westward with silk and lacquer and jade to trade for the gold and
silver of Armenia and Rome.

The splash over of the Yueh-Chi is recorded, but it is
fairly evident that much westward movement of sections of the Hunnish peoples
is not recorded. From 200 B.C. to 200 A.D. the Chinese Empire maintained a
hard, resolute, advancing front towards nomadism, and the surplus of the nomads
drifted steadily west. There was no such settling down behind a final frontier
on the part of the Chinese as we see in the case of the Romans at the Rhine and
Danube. The drift of the nomads before this Chinese thrust, century by century,
turned southward at first towards Bactria. The Parthians of the first century
B.C. probably mingled Scythian and Mongolian elements. The «singing arrows»
that destroyed the army of Crassus came, it would seem, originally from the
Altai and the Thien Shan.

After the first century B.C. the line of greater attraction
and least resistance lay for a time towards the north of the Caspian. In a
century or so all the country known as Western Turkestan was «Mongolized», and
so it remains to this day. A second great thrust by China began about 75 A.D.,
and accelerated the westward drift of the nomads. In 102, Pan Chau, a Chinese
general, was sending explorers from his advanced camp upon the Caspian (or, as
some authorities say, the Persian Gulf) to learn particulars of the Roman
power. But their reports decided him not to proceed.

By the first century A.D. nomadic Mongolian peoples were in
evidence upon the eastern boundaries of Europe, already greatly mixed with
Nordic nomads and with uprooted Nordic elements from the Caspian-Pamir region.
There were Hunnish peoples established between the Caspian Sea and the Urals.
West of them were the Alans, probably also a Mongolian people with Nordic
elements; they had fought against Pompey the Great when he was in Armenia in 65
B.C. These were as yet the furthest westward peoples of the new Mongolian
advance, and they made no further westward push until the fourth century A.D.
To the north-west the Finns, a Mongolian people, had long been established as
far west as the Baltic.

West of the Huns, beyond the Don, there were purely Nordic
tribes, the Goths. These Goths had spread south-eastward from their region of
origin in Scandinavia. They were a Teutonic people, and we have already marked
them crossing the Baltic in the map we have given of the earlier distribution
of the Aryan-speaking people. These Goths continued to move, south-eastward
across Russia, using the rivers and never forgetting their Baltic watercraft.
No doubt they assimilated much Scythian population as they spread down to the
Black Sea. In the first century A.D. they were in two main divisions, the
Ostrogoths, the east Goths, who were between the Don and the Dnieper, and the
Visigoths or, west Goths, west of the Dnieper. During the first century there
was quiescence over the great plains, but population was accumulating and the
tribes were fermenting. The second and third centuries seem to have been a
phase of comparatively moist seasons and abundant grass. Presently in the
fourth and fifth centuries the weather grew drier and the grass became scanty
and the nomads stirred afresh.

.. _Figure 477:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0477.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0477.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 477

    Figure 477: Map of Central Asia, 2nd & 1st Centuries B.C.

But it is interesting to note that in the opening century
Of the Christian era, the Chinese Empire was strong enough to expel and push
off from itself the surplus of this Mongolian nomadism to the north of it which
presently conquered North India and gathered force and mingled with Aryan
nomadism, and fell at last like an avalanche upon the weak-backed Roman Empire.

Before we go on to tell of the blows that now began to fall
upon the Roman Empire and of the efforts of one or two great men to arrest the
collapse, we may say a few words about the habits and quality of these
westward-drifting barbaric Mongolian peoples who were now spreading from the
limits of China towards the Black and Baltic Seas. It is still the European
custom to follow the lead of the Roman writers and write of these Huns and
their associates as of something incredibly destructive and cruel. But such
accounts as we have from the Romans were written in periods of panic, and the
Roman could lie about his enemies with a freedom and vigour that must arouse
the envy even of the modern propagandist. He could talk of «Punic faith» as a
byword for perfidy while committing the most abominable treacheries against
Carthage, and his railing accusations of systematic cruelty against this people
or that were usually the prelude and excuse for some frightful massacre or
enslavement or robbery on his own part. He had quite a Modern passion for
self-justification. We must remember that these accounts of the savagery and
frightfulness of the Huns came from a people whose chief amusement was
gladiatorial shows, and whose chief method of dealing with insurrection and
sedition was nailing the offender to a cross to die. From first to last the
Roman Empire must have killed hundreds of thousands of men in that way. A large
portion of the population of this empire that could complain of the barbarism
of its assailants consisted of slaves subject practically to almost any lust or
caprice at the hands of their owners. It is well to bear these facts in mind
before we mourn the swamping of the Roman Empire by the barbarians as though it
was an extinction of all that is fine in life by all that is black and ugly.

The facts seem to be that the Hunnish peoples were the
eastern equivalent of the primitive Aryans, and that, in spite of their
profound racial and linguistic differences, they mixed with the nomadic and
semi-nomadic residuum of the Aryan speaking races north of the Danube and
Persia very easily and successfully. Instead of killing, they enlisted and
intermarried with the peoples they invaded. They had that necessary gift for
all peoples destined to political predominance, tolerant assimilation. They
came rather later in time, and their nomadic life was more highly developed
than that of the primitive Aryans. The primitive Aryans were a forest and
ox-wagon people who took to the horse later. The Hunnish peoples had grown up
with the horse. Somewhere about 1200 or 1000 years B.C. they began to ride the
horse. The bit, the saddle, the stirrup, these are not primitive things, but
they are necessary if man and horse are to keep going for long stretches. It is
well to bear in mind how modern a thing is riding. Altogether man has not been
in the saddle for much more than three thousand years.\ [#fn5]_  We have already
noted the gradual appearance of the war-chariot, the mounted man, and finally
of disciplined cavalry in this history. It was from the Mongolian regions of
Asia that these things came. To this day men in Central Asia go rather in the
saddle than on their proper feet. Says Ratzel,\ [#fn6]_  «Strong, long-necked horses
are found in enormous numbers on the steppes. For Mongols and Turcomans riding
is not a luxury; even the Mongol shepherds tend their flocks on horseback.
Children are taught to ride in early youth; and the boy of three years old
often takes his first riding-lesson on a safe child's saddle and makes quick
progress».

It is impossible to suppose that the Huns and the Alans
could have differed very widely in character from the present nomads of the steppe
regions, and nearly all observers are agreed in describing these latter as open
and pleasant people. They are thoroughly honest and free-spirited. «The
character of the herdsmen of Central Asia», says Ratzel,\ [#fn7]_  «when
unadulterated, is ponderous eloquence, frankness, rough good-nature, pride, but
also indolence, irritability, and a tendency to vindictiveness. Their faces
show a considerable share of frankness combined with amusing naiveté . . .Their
courage is rather a sudden blaze of pugnacity than cold boldness. Religious
fanaticism they have none. Hospitality is universal». This is not an entirely
disagreeable picture. Their personal bearing, he says further, is quieter and
more dignified than that of the townsmen of Turkestan and Persia. Add to this
that the nomadic life prevents any great class inequalities or any extensive
development of slavery.

Of course these peoples out of Asia were totally illiterate
and artistically undeveloped. But we must not suppose, on that account, that
they were primitive barbarians, and that their state of life was at the level
from which the agricultural civilization had long ago arisen. It was not. They
too, had developed, but they had developed along a different line, a line with
less intellectual complication, more personal dignity perhaps, and certainly
with a more intimate contact with wind and sky.

.. [#fn3] E. H. Parker, :t:`A Thousand Years of the Tartars`.
.. [#fn4] Even in Eastern Turkestan there are still strong evidences of Nordic blood in the physiognomy of the people. Ella and Percy Sykes, Through Deserts and Oases of Central Asia.
.. [#fn5] See Roger Pocock, :t:`Horses`, a very interesting and picturesque little book.
.. [#fn6] :t:`The History of Mankind`, book v., C.
.. [#fn7] :t:`The History of Mankind`

