
28.6 The Eastern (revived Hellenic) Empire
========================================================================
But though throughout the whole of Western Europe and North
Africa the Roman imperial system had collapsed, though credit had vanished,
luxury production had ceased and money was hidden, though creditors were going
unpaid and slaves
masterless, the tradition of the Caesars was still being carried on in
Constantinople. We have already had occasion to mention as two outstanding
figures among the late Caesars, Diocletian (284) and Constantine the Great
(312), and it was to the latter of these that the world owes the setting up of
a fresh imperial centre at Constantinople. Very early during the imperial
period the unsuitability of the position of Rome as a world capital, due to the
Roman failure to use the sea, was felt.

.. _Figure 488:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0488.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0488.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 488

    Figure 488: Map — The Eastern Roman Empire circa 500 A.D.

    The Eastern Roman Empire circa 500 A.D., when Theodoric was king of Italy and Sicily, and nominally subject to the Emperor at Constantinople.

The destruction of Carthage and Corinth had killed the
shipping of the main Mediterranean sea-routes. For a people who did not use the
sea properly, having the administrative centre at Rome meant that every legion,
every draft of officials, every order, had to travel northward for half the
length of Italy before it could turn east or west. Consequently nearly all the
more capable emperors set up their headquarters at some subordinate centre in a
more convenient position. Sirmium (on the River Save), Milan, Lyons, and
Nicomedia (in Bithynia) were, among such supplementary capitals. For a time
under Diocletian, Durazzo was the imperial capital. Ravenna, near the head of
the Adriatic, was the capital of the last Roman emperors in the time of Alaric
and Stilicho.

It was Constantine the Great who determined upon the
permanent transfer of the centre of imperial power to the Bosphorus. We have
already noted the existence of the city of Byzantium, which Constantine chose
to develop into his new capital. It played a part in the story of the intricate
Histitaeus (Chap. XXI, sec 4); it repulsed Philip of Macedon (Chap. XXIII, sec
3). If the reader will examine its position, he will see that in the hands of a
line of capable emperors, and as the centre of a people with some solidarity
and spirit and seacraft (neither of which things were vouchsafed to it), it was
extraordinarily well placed. Its galleys could have penetrated up the rivers to
the heart of Russia and outflanked every barbarian advance. It commanded
practicable trade routes to the east, and it was within a reasonable striking
distance of Mesopotamia, Egypt, Greece, and all the more prosperous and
civilized regions of the world at that period. And even under the rule of a
series of inept monarchs and under demoralized social conditions, the remains
of the Roman Empire centring at Constantinople held out for nearly a thousand
years.

It was the manifest intention of Constantine the Great that
Constantinople should be the centre of an undivided empire. But having regard
to the methods of travel and transport available at the time, the geographical
conditions of Europe and Western Asia do not point to any one necessary centre
of government. If Rome faced westward instead of eastward, and so failed to
reach out beyond the Euphrates, Constantinople on the other hand was hopelessly
remote from Gaul. The enfeebled Mediterranean civilization, after a certain
struggle for Italy, did in fact let go of the west altogether and concentrated
upon what were practically the central vestiges, the stump, of the empire of
Alexander. The Greek language resumed its sway, which had never been very
seriously undermined by the official use of Latin. This «Eastern» or Byzantine Empire
is generally spoken of as if it were a continuation of the Roman tradition. It
is really far more like a resumption of Alexander's.

.. _Figure 490:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0490.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0490.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 490

    Figure 490: Map — Constantinople

    A map to illustrate the geographical advantages of Constantinople.

The Latin language had not the intellectual vigour behind
it, it had not the literature and the science, to make it a necessity to
intelligent men and so to maintain an ascendancy over the Greek. For no
language, whatever officialdom may do, can impose itself in competition with
another that can offer the advantages of a great literature or encyclopaedic
information. Aggressive languages must bring gifts, and the gifts of Greek were
incomparably greater than the gifts of Latin. The Eastern Empire was from the
beginnings of its separation Greek speaking, and a continuation, though a
degenerate continuation, of the Hellenic tradition. Its intellectual centre was
no longer in Greece, but Alexandria. Its mentality was no longer the mentality
of free-minded plain-speaking citizens, of the Stagirite Aristotle and the
Greek Plato; its mentality was the mentality of the pedants and of men
politically impotent; its philosophy was a pompous evasion of real things, and
its scientific impulse was dead. Nevertheless, it was Hellenic and not Latin.
The Roman had come, and he had gone again. Indeed he had gone very extensively
from the west also. By the sixth century A.D. the populations of Europe and
North Africa had been stirred up like sediment. When presently in the seventh
and eighth centuries the sediment begins to settle down again and populations
begin to take on a definite localized character, the Roman is only to be found by
name in the region about Rome. Over large parts of his Western empire we find
changed and changing modifications of his Latin speech; in Gaul, where the
Frank is learning a Gallic form of Latin and evolving French in the process; in
Italy, where, under the influence of Teutonic invaders, the Lombards and Goths,
Latin is being modified into various Italian dialects; in Spain and Portugal,
where it is becoming Spanish and Portuguese. The mental Latinity of the
languages in these regions serves to remind us of the numerical unimportance of
the various Frankish, Vandal, Avar, Gothic, and the like German-speaking
invaders, and serves to justify our statement that what happened to the Western
empire was not so much conquest and the replacement of one population by
another as a political and social revolution. The district of Valais in South
Switzerland also retained a fundamentally Latin speech and so did the Canton
Grisons; and, what is more curious and interesting, is that in Dacia and Moesia
Inferior, large parts of which to the north of the Danube became the modern
Roumania. (= Romania), although these regions were added late to the empire and
lost soon, the Latin speech also remained.

In Britain Latin was practically wiped out by the
conquering Anglo-Saxons, from among whose various dialects the root stock of
English presently grew.

But while the smashing of the Roman social and political
structure was thus complete, while in the east it was thrown off by the older
and stronger Hellenic tradition, and while in the west it was broken up into
fragments that began to take on a new and separate life of their own, there was
one thing that did not perish, 'but grew, and that was the tradition of the
world empire of Rome and of the supremacy of the Caesars. When the reality was
destroyed, the legend had freedom to expand. Removed from the possibility of
verification, the idea of a serene and splendid Roman world-supremacy grew up
in the imagination of mankind, and still holds it to this day.

Ever since the time of Alexander, human thought has been
haunted by the possible political unity of the race. All the sturdy chiefs and
leaders and kings of the barbarians, who raided through the prostrate but vast
disorder of the decayed empire, were capable of conceiving of some mighty king
of kings greater than themselves and giving a real law for all men, and they
were ready to believe that elsewhere in space and time, and capable of
returning presently to resume his supremacy, Caesar had been such a king of
kings. Far above their own titles, therefore, they esteemed and. envied the
title of Caesar. The international history of Europe from this time henceforth
is largely the story of kings and adventurers setting up to be Caesar and
Imperator (Emperor). We shall tell of some of them in their places. So
universal did this «Caesaring» become, that the Great War of 1914-18 mowed down
no fewer than four Caesars, the German Kaiser (= Caesar), the Austrian Kaiser,
the Tsar (= Caesar) of Russia, and that fantastic figure, the Tsar of Bulgaria.
The French «Imperator» (Napoleon III) had already fallen in 1871. There is now
(1920) no one left in the world to carry on the Imperial title or the tradition
of Divus Caesar except the Turkish Sultan and the British monarch. The former
commemorates his lordship over Constantinople as Kaisar-i-Roum; the latter is
called the Caesar of India (a country no real Caesar ever looked upon),
Kaisar-i-Hind.

