38.1 The Mechanical Revolution
========================================================================
The career and personality of Napoleon I bulks disproportionately in the
nineteenth century histories. He was of little significance to the broad onward
movement of human affairs; he was an interruption, a reminder of latent evils, a
thing like the bacterium of some pestilence. Even regarded as a pestilence, he
was not of supreme rank; he killed far fewer people than the influenza epidemic
of 1918, and produced less political and social disruption than the
plague of Justinian. Some such interlude had to happen, and some such patched-up
settlement of Europe as the Concert of Europe, because there was no worked-out
system of ideas upon which a new world could be constructed. And even the
Concert of Europe had in it an element of progress. It did at least set aside
the individualism of Machiavellian monarchy and declare that there was a human
or at any rate a European commonweal. If it divided the world among the kings,
it made respectful gestures towards human unity and the service of God and
man.

The permanently effective task before mankind which had to be before any new
and enduring social and political edifice was possible, the task upon which the
human intelligence is, with many interruptions and amidst much anger and
turmoil, still engaged, was, and is, the task of working out and applying a
Science of Property as a basis for freedom and social justice, a Science of
Currency to ensure and preserve an efficient economic medium, a Science of
Government and Collective Operations whereby in every community men may learn to
pursue their common interests in harmony, a Science of World Politics, through
which the stark waste and cruelty of warfare between races, peoples, and nations
may be brought to an end and the common interests of mankind brought under a
common control, and, above all, a world-wide System of Education to sustain the
will and interest of men in their common human adventure. The real makers of
history in the nineteenth century, the people whose consequences will be
determining human life a century ahead, were those who advanced and contributed
to this fivefold constructive effort. Compared to them, the foreign ministers
and «statesmen» and politicians of this period were no more than a number of
troublesome and occasionally incendiary schoolboys—and a few metal
thieves—playing about and doing transitory mischief amidst the accumulating
materials upon the site of a great building whose nature they did not
understand.

And while throughout the nineteenth century the mind of Western civilization,
which the Renascence had released, gathered itself to the task of creative
social and political reconstruction that still lies before it, there swept
across the world a wave of universal change in human power and the material
conditions of life that the first scientific efforts of that liberated mind had
made possible. The prophecies of Roger Bacon began to live in reality. The
accumulating knowledge and confidence of the little succession of men who had
been carrying on the development of science, now began to bear fruit that common
men could understand. The most obvious firstfruit was the steam-engine. The
first steam-engines in the eighteenth century were pumping engines used to keep
water out of the newly opened coal mines. These coal mines were being worked to
supply coke for iron smelting, for which wood-charcoal had previously been
employed. It was James Watt, a mathematical instrument maker of Glasgow, who
improved this steam-pumping engine and made it available for the driving of
machinery. The first engine so employed was installed in a cotton mill in
Nottingham in 1785. In 1804 Trevithick adapted the Watt engine to transport, and
made the first locomotive. In 1825 the first railway, between Stockton and
Darlington, was opened for traffic. The original engine (locomotive No. 1, 1825)
still adorns Darlington platform. By the middle of the century a network of
railways had spread all over Europe.

Here was a sudden change in what had long been a fixed condition of human
life, the maximum rate of land transport. After the Russian disaster, Napoleon
travelled from near Vilna to Paris in 312 hours. This was a journey of about
1,400 miles. He was travelling with every conceivable advantage, and he averaged
under five miles an hour. An ordinary traveller could not have done this
distance in twice the time. These were about the same maximum rates of travel as
held good between Rome and Gaul in the first century A.D., or between Sardis and
Susa in the fourth century B.C. Then suddenly came a tremendous change. The
railways reduced this journey for any ordinary traveller to less than
forty-eight hours. That is to say, they reduced the chief European distances to
about a tenth of what they had been. They made it possible to carry out
administrative work in areas ten times as great as any that had hitherto been
workable under one administration. The full significance of that possibility in
Europe still remains to be realized. Europe is still netted in boundaries drawn
in the horse and road era. In America the effects were immediate. To the United
States of America, sprawling westward, it meant the possibility of a continuous
access to Washington, however far the frontier travelled across the continent.
It meant unity, sustained on a scale that would otherwise have been
impossible.

The steamboat was, if anything, a little ahead of the steam-engine in its
earlier phases. There was a steamboat, the *Charlotte Dundas*, on the Firth
of Clyde Canal in 1802, and in 1807 an American named Fulton had a paying
steamer, *The Clermont*, with British-built engines, upon the Hudson river
above New York. The first steamship to put to sea was also an American, the
*Phoenix*, which went from New York (Hoboken) to Philadelphia. So, too, wag
the first ship using steam (she also had sails) to cross the Atlantic, the
*Savannah* (1819). All these were paddle-wheel boats, and paddle-wheel
boats are not adapted to work in heavy seas. The. paddles smash too easily, and
the boat is then disabled. The screw steamship followed rather slowly. Many
difficulties had to be surmounted before screw was a practicable thing. Not
until the middle of the century did the tonnage of steamships upon the sea begin
to overhaul that of sailing-ships. After that the evolution in sea transport was
rapid. For the first time men began to cross the seas, and oceans with some
certainty as to the date of their arrival. The transatlantic crossing, which had
been an uncertain adventure of several weeks—which might stretch to months—was
accelerated, until in 1910 it was brought down, in the case of the fastest
boats, to under five days, with a practically notifiable hour of arrival. All
over the oceans there was the same reduction in the time and the same increase
in the certainty of human communications.

Concurrently with the development of steam transport upon land and sea a new
and striking addition to the facilities of human intercourse arose out of the
investigations of Volta, Galvani, and Faraday into various electrical phenomena.
The electric telegraph came into existence in 1835. The first under seas cable
was laid in 1851 between France and England. In a few years the telegraph system
had spread over the civilized world, and news which had hitherto travelled
slowly from point to point became practically simultaneous throughout the
earth.

These things, the steam railway and the electric telegraph, were to the
popular imagination of the middle nineteenth century the most striking and
revolutionary of inventions, but they were only the most conspicuous and clumsy
firstfruits of a far more extensive process. Technical knowledge and skill were
developing with an extraordinary rapidity, and to an extraordinary extent
measured by the progress of any previous age. Far less conspicuous at first in
everyday life, but finally far more important, was the extension of man's power
over various structural materials. Before the middle of the eighteenth century
iron was reduced from its ores by means of wood-charcoal, was handled in small
pieces, and hammered and wrought, into shape. It was material for a craftsman.
Quality and treatment were enormously dependent upon the experience and sagacity
of the individual iron worker. The largest masses of iron could be dealt with
under those conditions amounted at most (in the sixteenth century) to two or
three tons. (There was a very definite upward limit, therefore, to the size of
cannon.) The blast furnace arose in the eighteenth century, and developed with
the use of coke. Not before the eighteenth century do we find rolled sheet iron
(1728) and rolled rods and bars (1783). Nasmyth's steam hammer came as late as
1838. The ancient world, because of its metallurgical inferiority, could not use
steam. The steam-engine, even the primitive pumping engine, could not develop
before sheet iron was available. The early engines seem to tile modern eye very
pitiful and clumsy bits or ironmongery, but they were the utmost that the
metallurgical science of the time could do. As late as 1856 came the Bessemer
process, and presently (1864) the open-hearth process, in which steel and every
sort of iron could be melted, purified, and cast in a manner and upon a scale
hitherto unheard of. To-day in the electric furnace one may see tons of
incandescent steel swirling about like boiling milk in a saucepan. Nothing in
the previous practical advances of mankind is comparable in its consequences to
the complete mastery over enormous masses of steel and iron and over their
texture and quality which man has now achieved. The railways and early engines
of all sorts were the mere first triumphs of the new metallurgical methods.
Presently came ships of iron and steel, vast bridges, and a new way of building
with steel upon a gigantic scale. Men realized too late that they had planned
their railways with far too timid a gauge, that they could have organized their
travelling with far more steadiness and comfort upon a much bigger scale.

Before the nineteenth century there were no ships in the world much over
2,000 tons burthen; now there is nothing wonderful about a 50,000-ton liner.
There are people who sneer at this kind of progress as being a progress in «mere
size», but that sort of sneering merely marks the intellectual limitations of
those who indulge in it. The great ship or the steel-frame building is not, as
they imagine, a magnified version of the small ship or building of the past; it
is a thing different in kind, more lightly and strongly built, of finer and
stronger materials; instead of being a thing of precedent and rule-of-thumb, it
is a thing of subtle and intricate calculation. In the old house or ship, matter
was dominant—the material and its needs had to be slavishly obeyed; in the new,
matter has been captured, changed, coerced. Think of the coal and iron and sand
dragged out of the banks and pits, wrenched, wrought, molten, and cast, to be
flung at last, a slender, glittering pinnacle of steel and glass, six hundred
feet above the crowded city!

We have given these particulars of the advance in man's knowledge of the
metallurgy of steel and its results by way of illustration. A parallel story
could be told of the metallurgy of copper and tin, and of a multitude of metals,
nickel and aluminium to name but two, unknown before the ninteenth century
dawned. It is in this great and growing mastery over substances, over different
sorts of glass, over rocks and plasters and the like, over colours and textures,
that the main triumphs of the mechanical revolution have thus far been achieved.
Yet we are still in the stage of the firstfruits in the matter. We have the
power, but we have still to learn how to use our power. Many of the first
employments of these gifts of science have been vulgar, tawdry, stupid, or
horrible. The artist and the adaptor have still hardly begun to work with the
endless variety of substances now at their disposal.

Parallel with this extension of mechanical possibilities the new science of
electricity grew up. It was only in the eighties of the nineteenth century that
this body of inquiry began to yield results to impress the vulgar mind. Then
suddenly came electric light and electric traction, and the transmutation of
forces, the possibility of sending *power*, that could be changed into
mechanical motion or light or heat as one chose, along a copper wire, as water
is sent along a pipe, began to come through to the ideas of ordinary
people….

The British and the French were at first the leading peoples in this great
proliferation of knowledge; but presently the, Germans, who had learnt humility
under Napoleon, showed such zeal and pertinacity in scientific inquiry as to
overhaul these leaders. British science was largely the creation of Englishmen
and Scotchmen\ [#fn1]_  working outside the ordinary centres of erudition.\ [#fn2]_  We have
told how in England the universities after the reformation ceased to have a wide
popular appeal, how they became the educational preserve of the nobility and
gentry, and the strongholds of the established church. A pompous and
unintelligent classical pretentiousness dominated them, and they dominated the
schools of the middle and upper classes. The only knowledge recognized was an
uncritical textual knowledge of a selection of Latin and Greek classics, and the
test of a good style was its abundance of quotations, allusions, and stereotyped
expressions. The early development of British science went on, therefore, in
spite of the formal educational organization, and in the teeth of the bitter
hostility of the teaching and clerical professions. French education, too, was
dominated by the classical tradition of the Jesuits, and consequently, it was
not difficult for the Germans to organize a body of investigators, small indeed
in relation to the possibilities of the case, but largo in proportion to the
little band of British and French inventors and experimentalists. And though
this work of research and experiment was making Britain and France the most rich
and powerful countries in the world, it was not making scientific and inventive
men rich and powerful. There is a necessary unworldliness about a sincere
scientific man; he is too preoccupied with his research to plan and scheme how
to make money out of it. The economic exploitation of his discoveries falls very
easily and naturally, therefore, into the hands of a more acquisitive type; and
so we find that the crops of rich men which every fresh phase of scientific and
technical progress has produced in Great Britain, though they have not displayed
quite the same passionate desire to insult and kill the goose that laid the
national golden eggs as the scholastic and clerical professions, have been quite
content to let that profitable creature starve. Inventors and discoverers came
by nature, they thought, for cleverer people to profit by.

In this matter the Germans were a little wiser. The German man «learned» did
not display the same vehement hatred of the new learning. They permitted its
development. The German business man and manufacturer again had not quite the
same contempt for the man of science as had his British competitor. Knowledge,
these Germans believed, might be a cultivated crop, responsive to fertilizers.
They did concede, therefore, a certain amount of opportunity to the scientific
mind; their public expenditure on scientific work was relatively greater, and
this expenditure was abundantly rewarded. By the latter half of the nineteenth
century the German scientific worker had made German a necessary language for
every science student who wished to keep abreast with the latest work in his
department, and in certain branches, and particularly in chemistry, Germany
acquired a very great superiority over her western neighbours. The scientific
effort of the sixties and seventies in Germany began to tell after the eighties,
and the Germans gained steadily upon Britain and France in technical and
industrial prosperity.

In an Outline of History such as this it is impossible to trace the network
of complex mental processes that led to the incessant extension of knowledge and
power that is now going on; all we can do here is to call the reader's attention
to the most salient turning-points that finally led the toboggan of human
affairs into its present swift ice-run of progress. We have told of the first
release of human curiosity and of the beginnings of systematic inquiry and
experiment. We have told, too, how, when the plutocratic Roman system and its
resultant imperialism had come and gone again, this process of inquiry was
renewed. We have told of the escape of investigation from ideas of secrecy and
personal advantage to the idea of publication and a brotherhood of knowledge,
and we have noted the foundation of the British Royal Society, the Florentine
Society, and their like as a consequence of this socializing of thought. These
things were the roots of the mechanical revolution; and so long as the root of
pure scientific inquiry lives, that revolution will progress. The mechanical
revolution itself began, we may say, with, the exhaustion of the wood supply for
the ironworks of England. This led to the use of coal, the coal mine led to the
simple pumping engine, the development of the pumping engine by Watt into a
machine-driving engine led on to the locomotive and the steamship. This was the
first phase of a great expansion in the use of steam. A second phase in the
mechanical revolution began with the application of electrical science to
practical problems and the development of electric lighting, power transmission,
and traction.

A third phase is to be distinguished when in the eighties a new type of
engine came into use, an engine in which the expansive force of an explosive
mixture replaced the expansive force of steam. The light, highly efficient
engines that were thus made possible were applied to the automobile, and
developed at last to reach such a pitch of lightness and efficiency as to render
flight—long known to be possible a practical achievement. A successful
flying-machine—but not a machine large enough to take up a human body—was made
by Professor Langley of the Smithsonian Institute of Washington as early as
1897. By 1909 the aeroplane was available for human locomotion. There had seemed
to be a pause in the increase of human speed with the perfection of railways and
automobile road traction, but with the flying machine came fresh reductions in
the effective distance between one point of the earth's surface and another. In
the eighteenth century the distance from London to Edinburgh was an eight days
journey; in 1918 the British Civil Air Transport Commission reported that the
journey from London to Melbourne, half-way round the earth, would probably, in a
few years' time, be accomplished in that same period of eight days.

Too much stress must not be laid upon these striking reductions in the time
distances of one place from another. They are merely one aspect of a much
profounder and more momentous enlargement of human possibility. The science of
agriculture and agricultural chemistry, for instance, made quite parallel
advances during the nineteenth century. Men learnt so to fertilize the soil as
to produce quadruple and quintuple the crops got from the same area in the
seventeenth century. There was a still more extraordinary advance in medical
science; the average duration of life rose, the daily efficiency increased, the
waste of life through ill-health diminished.

Now here altogether we have such a change in human life as to constitute a
fresh phase of history. In a little more, than a century this mechanical
revolution has been brought about. In that time man made a stride in the
material conditions of his life vaster than he had done during the whole long
interval between the palaeolithic stage and the age of cultivation, or between
the days: of Pepi in Egypt and those of George III. A new gigantic material
framework for human affairs has come into existence. Clearly it demands great
readjustments of our social, economical, and political methods. But these
readjustments have necessarily waited upon the development of the mechanical
revolution, and they are still only in their opening stage to-day.

.. [#fn1] But note Boyle and Sir Wm. Hamilton as conspicuous scientific men who were Irishmen.

.. [#fn2] It is worth noting that nearly all the great inventors in England during the eighteenth century were working men, that inventions proceeded from the workshop, and not from the laboratory. It is also worth noting that only two of these inventors accumulated fortunes and founded families. —E. B.

