
38.10 The Indian Precedent in Asia
========================================================================
It is difficult to believe that any large number of people really accepted
this headlong painting of the map of Africa in European colours as a permanent
new settlement of the world's affairs, but it is the duty of the historian to
record that it was so accepted. There was but a shallow historical background to
the European mind in the nineteenth century, hardly any sense of what
constitutes an enduring political system, and no habit of penetrating criticism.
The quite temporary advantages that the onset of the mechanical revolution in
the west had given the European Great Powers over the rest of the old world were
regarded by people, blankly ignorant of the great Mongol conquests of the
thirteenth and following centuries, as evidences of a permanent and assured
leadership. They had no sense of the transferability of science and its fruits.
They did not realize that Chinamen and Indians could carry on the work of
research as ably as Frenchmen or Englishmen. They believed that there was some
innate intellectual drive in the west, and some innate indolence and
conservatism in the east, that assured the Europeans a world predominance for
ever.

The consequence of this infatuation was that, the various European foreign
offices set themselves not merely to scramble with the British for the savage
and undeveloped regions of the world's surface, but also to carve up the
populous and civilized countries of Asia as though these peoples also were no
more than raw material for European exploitation. The inwardly precarious but
outwardly splendid imperialism of the British ruling class in India, and the
extensive and profitable. possessions of the Dutch in the East Indies, filled
the ruling and mercantile classes of the rival Great Powers with dreams of
similar glories in Persia, in the disintegrating Ottoman Empire, and in Further
India, China, and Japan. In the closing years of the nineteenth century it was
assumed, as the reader may verify by an examination of the current literature of
the period, to be a natural and inevitable thing that all the world should fall
under European dominion. With a reluctant benevolent effort the European mind
prepared itself to take up what Mr. Rudyard Kipling called «the White Man's
Burthen»—that is to say, the lordship of the earth. The Powers set themselves to
this enterprise in a mood of jostling rivalry, with half-educated or illiterate
populations at home, with a mere handful of men, a. few thousand at most,
engaged in scientific research, with their internal political systems in a state
of tension or convulsive change, with a creaking economic system of the most
provisional sort, and with their religions far gone in decay. They really
believed that the vast populations of eastern Asia could be permanently
subordinated to such a Europe.

Even to-day there are many people who fail to grasp the essential facts of
this situation. They do not realize that in Asia the average brain is not one
whit inferior in quality to the average European brain; that history shows
Asiatics to be as bold, as vigorous, as generous, as self-sacrificing, and as
capable of strong collective action as Europeans, and that there are and must
continue to be a great many more Asiatics than Europeans in the world. It has
always been difficult to restrain the leakage of knowledge from one population
to another, and now it becomes impossible. Under modern conditions world-wide
economic and educational equalization is in the long run inevitable. An
intellectual and moral rally of the Asiatics is going on at the present time.
The slight leeway of a century or so, a few decades may recover. At the present
time, for example, for one Englishman who knows Chinese thoroughly, or has tiny
intimate knowledge of Chinese life and thought, there are hundreds of Chinamen
conversant with everything the English know. The balance of knowledge in favour
of India may be even greater. To Britain, India sends students to India, Britain
sends officials, for the most part men untrained in scientific observation.
There is no organization whatever for the sending of European students, as
students, to examine and inquire into Indian history, archaeology, and current
affairs or for bringing learned Indians into contact with British students in
Britain.

Since the year 1898, the year of the seizure of Kiau-Chau by Germany and of
Wei-hai-wei by Britain, and the year after the Russian taking of Port Arthur,
events in China have moved more rapidly than in any other country except Japan.
A great hatred of Europeans swept like a flame over China, and a political
society for the expulsion of Europeans, the Boxers, grew up and broke out into
violence in 1900. This was an outbreak of rage and mischief on quite
old-fashioned lines. In 1900 the Boxers murdered 250 Europeans and, it is said,
nearly 30,000 Christians. China, not for the first time in history, was under
the sway of a dowager empress. She was an ignorant woman, but of great force of
character and in close sympathy with the Boxers. She supported them, and
protected those who perpetrated outrages on the Europeans. All that again is
what might have happened in 600 B.C. or thereabouts against the Huns.

Things came to a crisis in 1900. The Boxers became more and more threatening
to the Europeans in China. Attempts were made to send up additional European
guards to the Peking legations, but this only precipitated matters. The German
minister was shot down in the streets of Peking by a soldier of the imperial
guard. The rest of the foreign representatives gathered together and made a
fortification of the more favourably situated legations and stood a siege of two
months. A combined allied force of 20,000 under a German general then marched up
to Peking and relieved the legations, and the old Empress fled to Sian-fu, the
old capital of Tai-tsung. Some of the European troops committed grave atrocities
upon the Chinese civil population.\ [#fn10]_  That brings one up to about the level of
1850, let us say.

There followed the practical annexation of Manchuria by Russia, a squabble
among the powers, and in 1904 a British invasion of Tibet, hitherto a forbidden
country. But what did not appear on the surface of these events, and what made
all these events fundamentally different, was that China now contained a
considerable number of able people who had a European education and European
knowledge. The Boxer Insurrection subsided, and then the influence of this new
factor began to appear in talk of a constitution (1906), in the suppression of
opium-smoking, and in educational reforms. A constitution of the Japanese type
came into existence in 1909, making China a limited monarchy. But China is not
to be moulded to the Japanese pattern, and the revolutionary stir continued.
Japan, in her own reorganization, and in accordance with her temperament, had
turned her eyes to the monarchist west, but China was looking across the
Pacific. In 1911 the essential Chinese revolution began. In 1912 the emperor
abdicated, and the greatest community in the world became a republic. The
overthrow of the emperor was also the overthrow of the Manchus, and the
Mongolian pigtail, which had been worn by the Chinese since 1644, ceased to be
compulsory. It continues, however, to be worn by a large proportion of the
population.

At the present time it is probable that there is more good brain matter and
more devoted men working out the modernization and the reorganization of the
Chinese civilization than we should find directed to the welfare of any single
European people. China will presently have a modernized practicable script, a
press, new and vigorous modern universities, a reorganized industrial system,
and a growing body of scientific and economic inquiry. The natural industry and
ingenuity of her vast population will be released to co-operate upon terms of
equality with the Western world. She may have great internal difficulties ahead
of her yet; of that no man can judge. Nevertheless, the time may not be very
distant when the Federated States of China may be at one with the United States
of America and a pacified and reconciled Europe in upholding the organized peace
of the world.

.. [#fn10] See Putnam Weale’s :t:`Indiscreet Letters from Pekin`, a partly fictitious book, but true and vivid in its effects.
