
38.11 The History of Japan
========================================================================

.. _Figure 995:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0995.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0995.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 995

    Figure 995: Japan and the East Coast of Asia

The pioneer country, however, in the recovery of the Asiatic peoples was not
China, but Japan. We have outrun our story in telling of China. Hitherto Japan
has played but a small part in this history; her secluded civilization has not
contributed very largely to the general shaping of human destinies; she has
received much, but she has given little. The original inhabitants of the
Japanese Islands were probably a northern people with remote Nordic affinities,
the Hairy Ainu. But the Japanese proper are of the Mongolian race. Physically
they resemble the Amerindians, and there are many curious resemblances between
the prehistoric pottery and so forth of Japan and similar Peruvian products. It
is not impossible that they are a back-flow from the trans-Pacific drift of the
early heliolithic culture, but they may also have absorbed from the south a
Malay and even a Negrito element.

Whatever the origin of the Japanese, there can be no doubt that their
civilization, their writing, and their literary and artistic traditions are
derived from the Chinese. They were emerging from barbarism in the second and
third century of the Christian Era, and one of their earliest acts as a people
outside their own country was on invasion of Korea under a queen Jingo, who
seems to have played a large part in establishing their civilization. Their
history is an interesting and romantic one; they developed a feudal system and a
tradition of chivalry; their attacks upon Korea and China are an Eastern
equivalent of the English wars in France. Japan was first brought into contact
with Europe in the sixteenth century; in 1542 some Portuguese reached it in a
Chinese junk, and in 1549 a Jesuit missionary, Francis Xavier, began his
teaching there. The Jesuit accounts describe a country greatly devastated by
perpetual feudal war. For a time Japan welcomed European intercourse, and the
Christian missionaries made a great number of converts. A certain William Adams,
of Gillingham, in Kent, became the most trusted European adviser of the
Japanese, and showed them how to build big ships. There were voyages in
Japanese-built ships to India and Peru. Then arose complicated quarrels between
the Spanish Dominicans, the Portuguese Jesuits, and the English and Dutch
Protestants, each warning the Japanese against the evil political designs of the
others. The Jesuits, in a phase of ascendancy, persecuted and insulted the
Buddhists with great acrimony. These troubles interwove with the feudal
conflicts of the time. In the end the Japanese came to the conclusion that the
Europeans and their Christianity were an intolerable nuisance, and that Catholic
Christianity in particular was a mere cloak for the political dreams of the Pope
and the Spanish monarchy—already in possession of the Philippine Islands; there
was a great and conclusive persecution of the Christians, and in 1638 Japan with
the exception of one wretched Dutch factory on the minute island of Deshima in
the harbour of Nagasaki was absolutely closed to Europeans, and remained closed
for over 200 years. The Dutch on Deshima were exposed to almost unendurable
indignities. They had no intercourse with any Japanese except the special
officials appointed to deal with them. During those two centuries the Japanese
remained as completely cut off from the rest of the world as though they lived
upon another planet. It was forbidden to build any ship larger than a mere
coasting boat. No Japanese could go abroad, and no European enter the
country.

For two centuries Japan remained outside the main current of history. She
lived on in a state of picturesque feudalism enlivened by blood feuds, in which
about five per cent of the population, the *samurai,* or fighting men, and
the nobles and their families, tyrannized without restraint over the rest of the
population. All common men knelt when a noble passed; to betray the slightest
disrespect was to risk being slashed to death by his *samurai* . The elect
classes lived lives of romantic adventure without one redeeming gleam of
novelty; they loved, murdered, and pursued fine points of honour—which probably
bored the intelligent ones extremely. We can imagine the wretchedness of a
curious mind, tormented by the craving for travel and knowledge, cooped up in
these islands of empty romance.

Meanwhile the great World outside went on to wider visions and new powers.
Strange shipping became more frequent, passing the Japanese headlands; sometimes
ships were wrecked and sailors brought ashore. Through the Dutch settlement at
Deshima, their one link with the outer universe, came warnings that Japan was
not keeping pace with the power of the Western world. In 1837 a ship sailed into
Yedo Bay flying a strange flag of stripes and stars, and carrying some Japanese
sailors she had picked up far adrift in the Pacific. She was driven off by a
cannon shot. This flag presently reappeared on other ships. One in 1849 came to
demand the liberation of eighteen shippwrecked American sailors. Then in 1853
came four American warships under Commodore Perry, and refused to be driven
away. He lay at anchor in forbidden waters, and sent messages to the two rulers
who at that time shared the control of Japan. In 1854 he returned with ten
ships, amazing ships propelled by steam, and equipped with big guns, and he made
proposals for trade and intercourse that the Japanese had no power to resist. He
landed with a guard of 500 men to sign the treaty. Incredulous crowds watched
this visitation from the outer world, marching through the streets.

Russia, Holland, and Britain followed in the wake of America. Foreigners
entered the country, and conflicts between them and Japanese gentlemen of spirit
ensued. A British subject was killed in a street brawl, and a Japanese town was
bombarded by the British (1863). A great nobleman whose estates commanded the
Straits of Shimonoseki saw fit to fire on foreign vessels, and a second
bombardment by a fleet of British, French, Dutch, and American warships
destroyed his batteries and scattered his swordsmen. Finally an allied squadron
(1865), at anchor off Kioto, imposed a ratification of the treaties which opened
Japan to the world.

The humiliation of the Japanese by these events was intense, and it would
seem that the salvation of peoples lies largely in such humiliations. With
astonishing energy and intelligence they set themselves to bring their culture
and organization up to the level of the European powers. Never in all the
history of mankind did a nation make such a stride as Japan then did. In 1866
she was a mediaeval people, a fantastic caricature of the extremist romantic
feudalism; in 1899 hers was a completely Westernized people, on a level with the
most advanced European powers, and well in advance of Russia. She completely
dispelled the persuasion that Asia was in some irrevocable way hopelessly behind
Europe. She made all European progress seem sluggish and tentative by
comparison.

We cannot tell here in any detail of Japan's war with China in 1894-95. It
demonstrated the extent of her Westernization. She had an efficient Westernized
army and a. small but sound fleet. But the significance of her renascence,
though it was appreciated by Britain and the United States, who were already
treating her as if she were a European state, was not understood by the other
Great Powers engaged in the pursuit of new Indias in Asia. Russia was pushing
down through Manchuria to Korea, France was already established far to the south
in Tonkin and Annam, Germany was prowling hungrily on the look-out for some
settlement. The three powers combined to prevent Japan reaping any fruits from
the Chinese war, and particularly from establishing herself on the mainland at
the points commanding the Japan Sea. She was exhausted by her war with China,
and they threatened her with war.

In 1898 Germany descended upon China, and, making the murder of two
missionaries her excuse, annexed a portion of the province of Shang-tung.
Thereupon Russia seized the Liao-tung peninsula, and extorted the consent of
China to an extension of her trans-Siberian railway to Port Arthur; and in 1900
she occupied Manchuria. Britain was unable to resist the imitative impulse, and
seized the port of Wei-hai-wei (1898).How alarming these movements must have
been to every intelligent Japanese a glance at the map will show. They led to a
war with Russia which marks an epoch in the history of Asia, the close of the
period of European arrogance. The Russian people were, of course, innocent and
ignorant of this trouble that was being made for them half-way round the world,
and the wiser Russian statesmen were against these foolish thrusts; but a gang
of financial adventurers surrounded the Tsar, including the Grand Dukes, his
cousins. They had gambled deeply in the prospective looting of Manchuria and
China, and they would suffer no withdrawal. So there began a transportation of
great armies of Japanese soldiers across the sea to Port Arthur and Korea, and
the sending of endless trainloads of Russian peasants along the Siberian railway
to die in those distant battlefields.

The Russians, badly led and dishonestly provided, were beaten on sea and land
alike. The Russian Baltic Fleet sailed round Africa to be utterly destroyed in
the Straits of Tsbusbima. A revolutionary movement among the common people of
Russia, infuriated by this remote and reasonless slaughter, obliged the Tsar to
end the war (1905); he returned the southern half of Saghalien, which had been
seized by Russia in 1875, evacuated Manchuria, resigned Korea to Japan. The
White Man was beginning to drop his load in eastern Asia. For some years,
however, Germany remained in uneasy possession of Kiau-Chau.

