
38.12 Close of the Period of Overseas Expansion
========================================================================
We have already noted how the enterprise of Italy in Abyssinia had been
checked at the terrible battle of Adowa (1896), in which over 3,000 Italians
were killed and more than 4,000 taken prisoner. The phase of imperial expansion
at the expense of organized non-European states was manifestly drawing to a
close. It had entangled the quite sufficiently difficult political and social
problems of Great Britain, France, Spain, Italy, Germany, and Russia with the
affairs of considerable alien, unassimilable, and resentful populations; Great
Britain had Egypt (not formally annexed as yet), India, Burmah, and a variety of
such minor problems as Malta and Shanghai; France had cumbered herself with
Tonkin and Annam in addition to Algiers and Tunis; Spain was newly entangled in
Morocco; Italy had found trouble for herself in Tripoli; and German overseas
imperialism, though its «place in the sun» seemed a poor one, derived what
satisfaction it could from the thought of a prospective war with Japan over
Kiau-Chau. All these «subject» lands had populations at a level of intelligence
and education very little lower than those of the possessing country; the
development of a native press, of a collective self-consciousness, and of
demands for self-government was in each case inevitable, and the statesmen of
Europe had been far too busy achieving these empires to have any clear ideas of
what they would do with them when they got them.

The Western democracies, as they woke up to freedom, discovered themselves
«imperial», and were considerably embarrassed by the discovery. The East came to
the Western capitals with perplexing demands. In London the common Englishman
much preoccupied by strikes, by economic riddles, by questions of
nationalization, municipalization, and the like, found that his path was crossed
and his public meetings attended by a large and increasing number of swarthy
gentlemen in turbans, fezes, and other strange headgear, all saying in effect:
«You have got us. The people who represent your government have destroyed our
own government, and prevent us from making a, new one. What are you going to do
with us?»

