
38.13 The British Empire in 1914
========================================================================
We may note here briefly the very various nature of the constituents of the
British Empire in 1914. It was and is a quite unique political combination;
nothing of the sort has ever existed before.

First and central to the whole system was the «crowned republic» of the
United British Kingdoms, including (against the will of a considerable part of
the Irish people) Ireland. The majority of the British Parliament, made up of
the three united parliaments of England, Scotland, and Ireland, determines the
headship, the quality and policy of the ministry, and determines it largely on
considerations arising out of British domestic politics. It is this ministry
which is the effective supreme government, with powers of peace and war, over
all the rest of the empire.

Next in order of political importance to the British States were the «crowned
republics» of Australia, Canada, Newfoundland (the oldest British possession,
1583), New Zealand, and South Africa, all practically independent and
self-governing states in alliance with Great Britain, but each with a
representative of the Crown appointed by the Government in office;

Next the Indian Empire, an extension of the empire of the Great Mogul, with
its dependent and «protected» states reaching now from Baluchistan to Burmah,
and including Aden, in all of which empire the British Crown and the Indian
Office (under Parliamentary control) played the role of the original Turkoman
dynasty;

Then the ambiguous possession of Egypt, still nominally a part of the Turkish
Empire and still retaining its own monarch, the Khedive, but under almost
despotic British official rule;

Then the still more ambiguous «Anglo-Egyptian» Sudan province, occupied and
administered jointly by the British and by the (British controlled) Egyptian
Government;

Then a number of partially self-governing communities, some British in origin
and some not, with elected legislatures and an appointed executive, such as
Malta,\ [#fn11]_  Jamaica, the Bahamas, and Bermuda; then the Crown colonies, in which
the rule of the British Home Government (through the Colonial Office) verged on
autocracy, as in Ceylon, Trinidad, and Fiji (where there was an appointed
council), and Gibraltar and St. Helena (where there was a governor);

Then great areas of (chiefly) tropical lands, raw-product areas, with
politically weak and under-civilized native communities, which were nominally
protectorates, and administered either by a High Commissioner set over native
chiefs (as in Basutoland) or over a chartered company (as in Rhodesia). In some
cases the Foreign Office, in some cases the Colonial Office, and in some cases
the India Office had been concerned in acquiring the possessions that fell into
this last and least definite class of all, but for the most part the Colonial
Office was now responsible for them.

It will be manifest, therefore, that no single office and no single brain had
ever comprehended the British Empire as a whole. It was a mixture of growths and
accumulations entirely different from anything that has ever been called an
empire before. It guaranteed a wide peace and security; that is why it was
endured and sustained by many men of the «subject» races—in spite of official
tyrannies and insufficiencies, and of much negligence on the part of the «home»
public. Like the «Athenian empire», it was an overseas empire; its ways were sea
ways, and its common link was the British Navy. Like all empires, its cohesion
was dependent physically upon a method of communication; the development of
seamanship, ship-building, and steamships between the sixteenth and nineteenth
centuries had made it a possible and convenient Pax—the «Pax Britannica», and
fresh developments of air or swift land transport or of undersea warfare might
at any time make it inconvenient or helplessly insecure.

.. [#fn11] A new and much more liberal Maltese constitution was promulgated in June, 1920, practically putting Malta on the footing of a self-governing colony.
