
38.2 Relation of the Mechanical to the Industrial Revolution
========================================================================
There is a tendency in many histories to confuse together what we have here
called the *mechanical revolution* which was an entirely new thing in human
experience arising out of the development of organized science, a new step like
the invention of agriculture or the discovery of metals, with something else,
quite different in its origins, something for which there was already an
historical precedent, the social and financial development which is called the
*industrial revolution.* The two processes were going on together, they
were constantly reacting upon each other, but they were in root and essence
different. There would have been an industrial revolution of sorts if there had
been no coal, no steam, no machinery; but in that case it would probably have
followed far more closely upon the lines of the social and financial
developments of the later years of the Roman republic. It would have repeated
the story of dispossessed free cultivators, gang labour, great estates, great
financial fortunes, and a socially destructive financial process. Even the
factory method came before power and machinery. Factories were the product not
of machinery, but of the «division of labour». Drilled and sweated workers were
making such things as millinery, cardboard boxes and furniture, and colouring
maps and book illustrations, and so forth, before even water-wheels had been
used for industrial processes. There were factories in Rome in the days of
Augustus. New books, for instance, were dictated to rows of copyists in the
factories of the book-sellers. The attentive student of Defoe and of the
political pamphlets of Fielding will realize that the idea of herding poor
people into establishments to work collectively for their living was already
current in Britain before the close of the seventeenth century. There are
intimations of it even as early as More's :t:`Utopia` (1516). It was a social
and not a mechanical development.

Up to past the middle of the eighteenth century the social and economic
history of western Europe was in fact retreading the path along which the Roman
State had gone in the three last centuries B.C. America was in many ways a new
Spain, and India and China a new Egypt. But the political disunions of Europe,
the political convulsions against monarchy, the recalcitrance of the common folk
and perhaps also the greater accessibility of the western European intelligence
to mechanical ideas and inventions, turned the process into quite novel
directions. Ideas of human solidarity, thanks to Christianity, were far more
widely diffused in this newer European world, political power was not so
concentrated, and the man of energy anxious to get rich turned his mind,
therefore, very willingly from, the ideas of the slave and of gang labour to the
idea of mechanical power and the machine.

The mechanical revolution, the process of mechanical invention and discovery,
was a new thing in human experience, and it went on regardless of the social,
political, economic, and industrial consequences it might produce. The
industrial revolution, on the other hand, like most other human affairs, was and
is more and more profoundly changed and deflected by the constant variation in
human conditions caused by the mechanical revolution. And the essential
difference between the amassing of riches, the extinction of small farmers and
small business men and the phase of big finance in the latter centuries of the
Roman Republic on the one hand, and the very similar concentration of capital in
the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries on the other, lies in the profound
difference in the character of labour that the mechanical revolution was
bringing about. The power of the old world was human power; everything depended
ultimately upon the driving power of human muscle, the muscle of ignorant and
subjugated men. A little animal muscle, supplied by draft oxen, horse traction,
and the like, contributed. Where a weight had to be lifted, men lifted it; where
a rock had to be quarried, men chipped it out; where a field had to be ploughed,
men and oxen ploughed it; the Roman equivalent of the steamship was the galley
with its banks of sweating rowers. A vast proportion of mankind in the early
civilizations was employed in purely mechanical drudgery. At its onset,
power-driven machinery did not seem to promise any release from such
unintelligent toil. Great gangs of men were employed in excavating canals, in
making railway cuttings and embankments, and the like. The number of miners
increased enormously. But the extension of facilities and the output of
commodities increased much more. And as the nineteenth century went on, the
plain logic of the new situation asserted itself more clearly. Human beings were
no longer wanted as a source of mere indiscriminate power. What could be done
mechanically by a human being could be done faster and better by a machine. The
human being was needed now only where choice and intelligence had to be
exercised. Human beings were wanted only as human beings. The *drudge*, on
whom all the previous civilizations had rested, the creature of mere obedience
the man whose brains were superfluous; had become unnecessary to the welfare of
mankind.

This was as true of such ancient industries, as agriculture and mining as it
was of the newest metallurgical processes. For ploughing, sowing, and
harvesting, swift machines came forward to do the work of scores of men.\ [#fn3]_  The
Roman civilization was built upon cheap and degraded human beings; modern
civilization is being rebuilt upon cheap mechanical power. For a hundred years
power has been getting cheaper and labour dearer. If for a generation or so
machinery has had to wait its turn in the mine, it is simply because for a time
men were cheaper than machinery.\ [#fn4]_ 

Now here was a change-over of quite primary importance in human affairs. The
chief solicitude of the rich and of the ruler in the old civilization had been
to keep up a supply of drudges. As the nineteenth century went on, it became
more and more plain to the intelligent directive people that the common man had
now to be something better than a drudge. He had to be educated—if only to
secure «industrial efficiency». He had to understand what he was about. From the
days of the first Christian propaganda, popular education had been smouldering
in Europe, just as it has smouldered in Asia wherever Islam has set its foot,
because of the necessity of making the believer understand a little of the
belief by which he is saved, and of enabling him to read a little in the sacred
books by which his belief is conveyed. Christian controversies, with their
competition for adherents, ploughed the ground for the harvest of popular
education. In England, for instance, by the thirties and forties of the
nineteenth century, the disputes of the sects and the necessity of catching
adherents young had produced an abundance of night schools, Sunday schools, and
a series of competing educational organizations for children, the dissenting
British schools, the church National Schools, and even Roman Catholic elementary
schools. The earlier, less enlightened manufacturers, unable to take a broad
view of their own interests, hated and opposed these schools. But here again
needy Germany led her richer neighbours. The religious teacher in Britain
presently found the profit-seeker at his side, unexpectedly eager to get the
commonalty, if not educated, at least «trained» to a higher level of economic
efficiency.

The second half of the nineteenth century was a period of rapid advance in
popular education throughout all the Westernized world There was no parallel
advance in the education of the upper classes, some advance no doubt, but
nothing to correspond, and so the great gulf that had divided that world
hitherto into the readers and the non-reading mass became little more than a
slightly perceptible difference in educational level. At the back of this
process was the mechanical revolution, apparently regardless of social
conditions, but really insisting inexorably upon the complete abolition of a
totally illiterate class throughout the world.

The economic revolution of the Roman republic had never been clearly
apprehended by the common people of Rome. The ordinary Roman citizen never saw
the changes through which he lived, clearly and comprehensively as we see them.
But the industrial revolution, as it went on towards the end of the nineteenth
century, was more and more distinctly *seen* as one whole process by the
common people it was affecting, because presently they could read and discuss
and communicate, and because they went about and saw things as no commonalty had
ever done before.

In this *Outline of History* we have been careful to indicate the
gradual appearance of the ordinary people as a class with a will and ideas in
common. It is the writer's belief that massive movements of the «ordinary
people» over considerable areas only became possible as a result of the
propagandist religions, Christianity and Islam, and their insistence upon
individual self-respect. We have cited the enthusiasm of the commonalty for the
First Crusade as marking a new phase in social history. But before the
nineteenth century even these massive movements were comparatively restricted.
The equalitarian insurrections of the peasantry, from the Wycliffe period
onward, were confined to the peasant communities of definite localities, they
spread only slowly into districts affected by similar forces. The town artisan
rioted indeed, but only locally. The château-burning of the French revolution
was not the act of a peasantry who had overthrown a government. It was the act
of a peasantry released by the overthrow of a government. The Commune of Paris
was the first effective appearance of the town artisan as a political power, and
the Parisian crowd of the First Revolution was a very mixed, primitive-thinking,
and savage crowd compared with any Western European crowd after 1830 .

But the mechanical revolution was not only pressing education upon the whole
population, it was leading to a big-capitalism and to a large-scale
reorganization of industry that was to produce a new and distinctive system of
ideas in the common people in the place of the mere uncomfortable recalcitrance
and elemental rebellions of an illiterate commonalty. We have already noted how
the industrial revolution had split the manufacturing class, which had hitherto
been a middling and various sort of class, into two sections, the employers, who
became rich enough to mingle with the financial, merchandizing, and land-owning
classes, and the employees, who drifted to a status closer and closer to that of
mere gang and agricultural labour. As the manufacturing employee sank, the
agricultural labourer, by the introduction of agricultural machinery and the
increase in his individual productivity, rose. By the middle of the nineteenth
century, Karl Marx (1818-83) a German Jew of great scholarly attainments, who
did much of his work in the British Museum library in London, was pointing out
that the organization of the working classes by the steadily concentrating group
of capitalist owners was developing a new social classification to replace the
more complex class systems of the past. Property, so far as it was power, was
being gathered together into relatively, few hands, the hands of the big rich
men, the capitalist class; while there was a great mingling of workers with
little or no property, whom he called the «expropriated», or «proletariat»—a
misuse of this word—who were bound to develop a common «class consciousness» of
the conflict of their interests with those of the rich men. Differences of
education and tradition between the various older social elements which were in
process of being fused up into the new class of the expropriated, seemed for a
time to contradict this sweeping generalization; the traditions of the
professions, the small employers, the farmer peasant and the like were all
different from one another and from the various craftsman traditions of the
workers; but with the spread of education and the cheapening of literature, this
«Marxian» generalization becomes now more and more acceptable. These classes,
who were linked at first by nothing but a common impoverishment, were and are
being reduced or raised to the same standard of life, forced to read the same
books and share the same inconveniences. A sense of solidarity between all sorts
of poor and propertyless men, as against the profit amassing and
wealth-concentrating class, is growing more and more evident in our world. Old
differences fade away, the difference between craftsman and open-air worker,
between black coat and overall, between poor clergyman and elementary
schoolmaster, between policeman and bus-driver. They must all buy the same cheap
furnishings and live in similar cheap houses; their sons and daughters will all
mingle and marry; success at the upper levels becomes more and more hopeless for
the rank and file. Marx, who did not so much advocate the class-war, the war of
the expropriated mass against the appropriating few, as foretell it, is being
more and more justified by events.\ [#fn5]_ 

.. [#fn3] Here America led the old world.

.. [#fn4] In Northumberland and Durham in the early days of coal mining they were so cheaply esteemed that it was unusual to hold inquests on the bodies of men killed in mine disasters.

.. [#fn5] It is sometimes argued against Marx that the proportion of people who have savings invested has increased in many modern communities. These savings are technically "capital" and their owners "capitalists" to that extent, and this is supposed to contradict the statement of Marx that property concentrates into few and fewer hands. Marx used many of his terms carelessly and chose them ill, and his ideas were better than his words. When he wrote property he meant "property so far as it is power." The small investor has remarkably little power over his invested capital.
