
38.4 The Development of the Idea of Socialism
========================================================================
We have traced throughout this history the gradual restriction of the idea of
property from the first unlimited claim of the strong man to possess everything
and the gradual realization of brotherhood as something transcending personal
selfseeking. Men were first subjugated into more than tribal societies by the
fear of monarch and deity. It is only within the last three or at most four
thousand years that we have any clear evidence that voluntary self-abandonment
to some greater end, without fee or reward, was an acceptable idea to men, or
that anyone had propounded it. Then we find spreading over the surface of human
affairs, as patches of sunshine spread and pass over the hillsides upon a windy
day in spring, the idea that there is a happiness in self-devotion greater than
any personal gratification or triumph, and a life of mankind different and
greater and more important than the sum of all the individual lives within it.
We have seen that idea become vivid as a beacon, vivid as sunshine caught and
reflected dazzlingly by some window in the landscape, in the teachings of
Buddha, Lao Tse, and, most clearly of all, of Jesus of Nazareth. Through all its
variations and corruptions Christianity has never completely lost the suggestion
of a devotion to God's commonweal that makes the personal pomps of monarchs and
rulers seem like the insolence of an overdressed servant and the splendours and
gratifications of wealth like the waste of robbers. No man living in a community
which such a religion as Christianity or Islam has touched can be altogether a
slave; there is an ineradicable quality in these religions that compels men to
judge their masters and to realize their own responsibility for the world.

As men have felt their way towards this new state of mind from the fierce
self-centred greed and instinctive combativeness of the early paleolithic
family group, they have sought to express the drift of their thoughts and
necessities very variously. They have found themselves in disagreement and
conflict with old-established ideas, and there has been a natural tendency to
contradict these ideas flatly, to fly over to the absolute contrary. Faced by a
world in which rule and classes and order seem to do little but give opportunity
for personal selfishness and unrighteous oppression, the first impatient
movement was to declare for a universal equality and a practical anarchy. Faced
by a world in which property seemed little more than a protection for
selfishness and a method of enslavement, it was as natural to repudiate all
property. Our history shows an increasing impulse to revolt against rulers and
against ownership. We have traced it in the middle ages burning the rich man's
châteaux and experimenting in theocracy and communism. In the French revolutions
this double revolt is clear and plain. In France we find side by side, inspired
by the same spirit and as natural parts of the same revolutionary movement, men
who, with their eyes on the ruler's taxes, declared that property should be
inviolable, and others who, with their eyes on the employer's hard bargains,
declared that property should be abolished. But what they are really revolting
against in each case is that the ruler and the employer, instead of becoming
servants of the community, still remain, like most of mankind, self-seeking,
oppressive individuals.

Throughout the ages we find this belief growing in men's minds that there can
be such a rearrangement of laws and powers as to give rule and order while still
restraining the egotism of any ruler and of any ruling class that maybe
necessary, and such a definition of property as will give freedom without
oppressive power. We begin to realize nowadays that these ends are only to be
attained by a complex constructive effort; they arise through the conflict of
new human needs against ignorance and old human nature; but throughout the
nineteenth century there was a persistent disposition to solve the problem by
some simple formula. (And be happy ever afterwards, regardless of the fact that
all human life, all life, is throughout the ages nothing but the continuing
solution of a continuous synthetic problem.)

The earlier half of the nineteenth century saw a number of experiments in the
formation of trial human societies of a new kind. Among the most important
historically were the experiments and ideas of Robert Owen (1771-1858), a
Manchester cotton-spinner. He is very generally regarded as the founder of modem
Socialism; it was in connection with his work that the word «socialism» first
arose (about 1835).

He seems to have been a thoroughly competent business man; he made a number
of innovations in the cotton-spinning industry, and acquired a fair fortune at
an early age. He was distressed by the waste of human possibilities among his
workers, and he set himself to improve their condition and the relations of
employer and employed. This he sought to do first at his Manchester factory and
afterwards at New Lanark, where he found himself in practical control of works
employing about two thousand people. Between 1800 and 1828 be achieved very
considerable things: he reduced the hours of labour, made his factory sanitary
and agreeable, abolished the employment of very young children, improved the
training of his workers, provided unemployment pay during a period of trade
depression, established a system of schools, and made New Lanark a model of
better, industrialism, while at the same time sustaining its commercial
prosperity. He wrote vigorously to defend the mass of mankind against the
charges of intemperance and improvidence which were held to justify the economic
iniquities of the time. He held that men and women are largely the product of
their educational environment, a thesis that needs no advocacy to-day. And he
set himself to a propaganda of the views that New Lanark had justified. He
attacked the selfish idolence of his fellow manufacturers, and in 1819, largely
under his urgency, the first Factory Act was passed, the first attempt to
restrain employers from taking the most stupid and intolerable advantages of
their workers' poverty. Some of the restrictions of that Act amaze us to-day. It
seems incredible now that it should ever have been necessary to protect little
children of *nine* (!) from work in factories, or to limit the nominal
working day of such employees to *twelve, hours!*

People are perhaps too apt to write of the industrial revolution, as though
it led to the enslavement and overworking of poor children who had hitherto been
happy and free. But this misinterprets history. From the very beginnings of
civilization the little children of the poor had always been obliged to do
whatever work they could do. But the factory system gathered up all this
infantile toil and made it systematic, conspicuous, and scandalous. The factory
system challenged the quickening human conscience on that issue. The British
Factory Act of 1819, weak and feeble though it seems to us, was the Magna Carta
of childhood; thereafter the protection of the children of the poor, first from
toil and then from bodily starvation and ignorance, began.

We cannot tell here in any detail the full story of Owen's life and thought.
His work at New Lanark had been, he felt, only a trial upon a small working
model. What could be done for one industrial community could be done, he held,
for every industrial community in the country; he advocated a resettlement of
the industrial population in townships on the New Lanark plan. For a time he
seemed to have captured the imagination of the world. The *Times* and
*Morning Post* supported his proposals; among the visitors to New Lanark
was the Grand Duke Nicholas who succeeded Alexander I as Tsar; a fast friend was
the Duke of Kent, son of George III and father of Queen Victoria. But all the
haters of change and all—and there are always many such—who were jealous of the
poor, and all the employers who were likely to be troubled by his projects, were
waiting for an excuse to counter-attack him, and they found it in the expression
of his religious opinions, which were hostile to official Christianity, and,
through those he was successfully discredited. But he continued to develop his
projects and experiments, of which the chief was a community at New Harmony in
Indiana (U.S.A.), in which he sank most of his capital. His partners bought him
out of the New Lanark business in 1828.

Owen's experiments and suggestions ranged very widely, and do not fall under
any single formula. There was nothing doctrinaire about him. His New Lanark
experiment was the first of a number of «benevolent businesses» in the world;
Lord Leverhulme's Port Sunlight, the Cadburys' Bournville, and the Ford
businesses in America are contemporary instances; it was not really a socialist
experiment at all; it was a «paternal» experiment. But his proposals for state
settlements were what we should call state socialism to-day. His American
experiment and his later writings point to a completer form of socialism, a much
wider departure from the existing state of affairs. It is clear that the riddle
of currency exercised Owen. He understood that we can no more hope for real
economic justice while we pay for work with money of fluctuating value than we
could hope for a punctual world if there was a continual inconstant variability
in the length of an hour. One of his experiments was an attempt at a circulation
of labour notes representing one hour, five hours, or twenty hours of work. The
co-operative societies of to-day, societies of poor men which combine for the
collective buying and distribution of commodities or for collective manufacture
or dairying or other forms, of agriculture, arose directly out of his
initiatives, though the pioneer co-operative societies of his own time ended in
failure. Their successors have spread throughout the whole world, and number
to-day some thirty or forty million of adherents.

A point to note about this early socialism of Owen's is that it was not at
first at all «democratic». Its initiative was benevolent, its early form
patriarchal; it was something up to which the workers were to be educated by
liberally disposed employers and leaders. The first socialism was not a worker's
movement, it was a master's movement.

Concurrently with this work of Owen's, another and quite independent series
of developments was going on in America and Britain which was destined to come
at last into reaction with his socialistic ideas. The English law had long
prohibited combinations in restraint of trade, combinations to raise prices or
wages by concerted action. There had been no great hardship in these
prohibitions before the agrarian and industrial changes of the eighteenth
century let loose a great swarm of workers living from hand to mouth and
competing for insufficient employment. Under these new conditions, the workers
in many industries found themselves intolerably squeezed. They were played off
one against another; day by day and hour by hour none knew what concession his
fellow might not have made, and what further reduction of pay or increase of
toil might not ensue. It became vitally necessary for the workers to make
agreements—illegal though they were—against such underselling. At first these
agreements had to be made and sustained by secret societies. Or clubs,
established ostensibly for quite other purposes, social clubs, funeral
societies, and the like, served to mask the wage-protecting combination. The
fact that these associations were illegal disposed them to violence; they were
savage against «blacklegs» and «rats» who would not join them, and still more
savage with traitors. In 1824 the House of Commons recognized the desirability
of relieving tension in these matters by conceding the right of workmen to form
combinations for «collective bargaining» with the masters. This enabled Trade
Unions to develop with a large measure of freedom. At first very clumsy and
primitive organizations and with very restricted freedoms, the Trade Unions have
risen gradually to be a real Fourth Estate in the country, a great system of
bodies representing the mass of industrial workers.

Arising at first in Britain and America, they have, with various national
modifications, and under varying legal conditions, spread to France, Germany,
and all the westernized communities.

Organized originally to sustain wages and restrict intolerable hours, the
Trade Union movement was at first something altogether distinct from socialism.
The Trade Unionist tried to make the best for himself of the existing capitalism
and the existing conditions of employment; the socialist proposed to change the
system. It was, the imagination and generalizing power of Karl Marx which
brought these two movements into relationship. He was a man with the sense of
history very strong in him; he was the first to perceive that the old social
classes that had endured since the beginning of civilization were in process of
dissolution and regrouping. His racial Jewish commercialism made the antagonism
of property and labour very plain to him. And his upbringing in Germany—where,
as we have pointed out, the tendency of class to harden into caste was more
evident than in any other European country—made him conceive of labour as
presently becoming «class conscious» and collectively antagonistic to the
property-concentrating classes. In the Trade Union movement, which was spreading
over the world, be believed he saw this development of class-conscious
labour.

What he asked, would be the outcome of the «class war» of the capitalist and
proletariat? The capitalist adventurers, he alleged, because of their inherent
greed and combativeness, would gather power over capital into fewer and fewer
hands, until at last they would concentrate all the means of production,
transit, and the like into a form seizable by the workers, whose class
consciousness and solidarity would be developed *pari passu* by the process
of organizing and concentrating industry. They would seize this capital and work
it for themselves. This would be the social revolution. Then individual property
and freedom would be restored, based upon the common ownership of the earth and
the management by the community as a whole of the great productive services
which the private capitalist had organized and concentrated. This would be the
end of the «capitalist» system, but not the end of the system of capitalism.
State capitalism would replace private owner capitalism.

This marks a great stride away from the socialism of Owen. Owen (like Plato)
looked to the common sense of men of any or every class to reorganize the casual
and faulty political, economic, and social structure. Marx found something more
in the nature of a driving force in his class hostility based on expropriation
and injustice. And he was not simply a prophetic theorist; he was also a
propagandist of the revolt of labour, the revolt of the so-called «proletariat».
Labour, he perceived, had a common interest against the capitalist everywhere,
though under the test of the Great Power wars of the time, and particularly of
the liberation of Italy, he showed that he failed to grasp the fact that labour
everywhere has a common interest in the peace of the world. But with the social
revolution in view he did succeed in inspiring the formation of an international
league of workers, the First International.

The subsequent history of socialism is chequered between the British
tradition of Owen and the German class feeling of Marx. What is called Fabian
Socialism, the exposition, of socialism, by the London Fabian Society, makes its
appeal to reasonable men of all classes. What are called «Revisionists» in
German Socialism incline in the same direction. But on the whole, it is Marx who
has carried the day against Owen, and the general disposition of socialists
throughout the world is to look to the organization of labour and labour only to
supply the fighting forces that will disentangle the political and economic
organization of human affairs from the hands of the more or less irresponsible
private owners and adventurers who, now control it.

These are the broad features of the project which is called Socialism. We
will discuss its incompletenesses and inadequacies in our next section. It was
perhaps inevitable that socialism should be greatly distraught and subdivided by
doubts and disputes and sects and schools; they are growth symptoms like the
spots on a youths face. Here we can but glance at the difference between state
socialism, which would run the economic business of the country through its
political government, and the newer schools of syndicalism and guild socialism
which would entrust a large measure in the government of each industry to the
workers of every grade—including the directors and managers—engaged in that
industry. This «guild socialism» is really a new sort of capitalism with a
committee of workers and officials in each industry taking the place of the free
private capitalists of that industry. The *personnel* becomes the
collective capitalist. Nor can we discuss the undemocratic idea of the Russian
leader Lenin, that a population cannot judge of socialism before it has
experienced it and that a group of socialists are therefore justified, in
seizing and socializing, if they can, the life of a country without at first
setting up any democratic form of general government at all, for which sort of
seizure he uses the Marxian phrase, a very incompetent phrase, the «dictatorship
of the proletariat.''

All Russia now is a huge experiment in that dictatorship. The «proletariat»
is supposed to be dictating the government of Russia through committees of
workmen and soldiers, the Soviets, but as a matter of fact these Soviets have
little or no real directive power. They assemble in meetings so big as to be
practically mass meetings, and the utmost they can do is to give a general
assent to the proceedings of the government. The Petersburg Soviet, which the
writer visited in September, 1920, was a mass meeting of over three thousand
people, incapable of any detailed criticism or direction of the Bolshevik
government.\ [#fn6]_ 

.. [#fn6] Wells, Russia in the Shadows .
