
38.5 Shortcoming of Socialism as a Scheme of Human Society
========================================================================
We are all socialists nowadays, said Sir William Harcourt years ago, and that
is loosely true to-day. There can be few people who fail to realize the
provisional nature and the dangerous instability of our present political and
economic system, and still fewer who believe with the doctrinaire individualists
that profit-hunting «go as you please» will guide mankind to any haven of
prosperity and happiness. Great rearrangements are necessary, and a systematic
legal subordination of personal self-seeking to the public good. So far most
reasonable men are socialists. But these are only preliminary propositions. How
far has socialism and modern thought generally gone towards *working out*
the conception of this new political and social order, of which our world
admittedly stands in need? We are obliged to answer that there is no clear
conception of the new state towards which we vaguely struggle, that our science
of human relationships is still so crude and speculative as to leave us without
definite guidance upon a score of primarily important issues. In 1920 we are no
more in a position to set up a scientifically conceived political system in the
world than were men to set up an electric power station in 1820. They could not
have done that then to save their lives.

The Marxist system points us to an accumulation of revolutionary forces in
the modern world. These forces will continually tend towards revolution. But
Marx assumed too hastily that a revolutionary impulse would necessarily produce
an ordered state of a new and better kind. A revolution may stop half-way in
mere destruction. No socialist sect; has yet defined its protected government
clearly; the Bolsheviks in their Russian experiment seem to have been guided by
a phrase, the dictatorship of the proletariat, and in practice, we are told,
Trotsky and Lenin have proved as autocratic as the less intelligent but equally
well-meaning Tsar, Alexander I. We have been at some pains to show from our
brief study of the French revolution that a revolution can establish nothing
permanent that has not already been thought out beforehand and apprehended by
the general mind. The French republic, confronted with unexpected difficulties
in economics, currency, and international relationships, collapsed to the
egotisms of the newly rich people of the Directory, and finally to the egotism
of Napoleon. Law and a plan, steadily upheld, are more necessary in
revolutionary times than in ordinary humdrum times, because in revolutionary
times society degenerates much more readily into a mere scramble under the
ascendancy of the forcible and cunning.

If in general terms we take stock of the political and social science of our
age, we shall measure something of the preliminary intellectual task still to be
done by mankind before we can hope to see any permanent constructive
achievements emerging from the mere traditionalism and adventuring that rule our
collective affairs to-day. This Socialism, which professes to be a complete
theory of a new social order, we discover, when we look into it, to be no more
than a partial theory—very illuminating, so far as it goes—about property. We
have already discussed the relationship of social development to the restriction
of the idea of property. There are various schools of thought which would
restrict property more or less completely. Communism is the proposal to abolish
property altogether, or, in other words, to hold all things in common. Modern
Socialism, on the other hand—or, to give it a more precise name,
«Collectivism»—does clearly distinguish between personal property and collective
property. The gist of the socialist proposal is that land and all the natural
means of production, transit, and distribution should be collectively owned.
Within these limits there is to be much free private ownership and unrestricted
personal freedom. Given efficient administration, it may be doubted whether many
people nowadays would dispute that proposal. But socialism has never gone on to
a thorough examination of that proviso for efficient administration.

Again, what community is it that is to own the collective property; is it to
be the sovereign or the township or the county or the nation or mankind?
Socialism makes no clear answer. Socialists are very free with the word
«nationalize», but we have been subjecting the ideas of «nations» and
«nationalism» to some destructive criticism in this *Outline*. If
socialists object to a single individual claiming a mine or a great stretch of
agricultural land as his own individual property, with a right to refuse or
barter its use and profit to others, why should they permit a single nation to
monopolize the mines or trade routes or natural wealth of the territories in
which it lives, against the rest of mankind? There seems to be great confusion
in socialist theory in this matter. And unless human life is to become a mass
meeting of the race in permanent session, how is the community to appoint its
officers to carry on its collective concerns? After all, the private owner of
land or of a business or the like is a sort of public official in so far as his
ownership is sanctioned and protected by the community. Instead of being paid a
salary or fees, he is allowed to make a profit. The only valid reason for
dismissing him from his ownership is that the new control to be substituted will
be more efficient and profitable and satisfactory to the community. And, being
dismissed, he has at least the same claim to consideration from the community
that he himself has shown in the past to the worker thrown out of employment by
a mechanical invention.

This question of administration, the sound and adequate bar to much immediate
socialization, brings us to the still largely unsolved problem of human
association; how are we to secure the best direction of human affairs and the
maximum of willing co-operation with that direction? This is ultimately a
complex problem in psychology, but it is absurd to pretend that it is an
insoluble one. There must be a definite best, which is the right thing, in these
matters. But if it is not insoluble, it is equally unreasonable to pretend that
it has been solved. The problem in its completeness involves the working out of
the best methods in the following departments, and their complete
correlation.

(i) Education.—The preparation of the individual for an understanding and
willing co-operation in the world's affairs.

(ii) Information.—The continual truthful presentation of public affairs to
the individual for his judgment and approval. Closely connected with this need
for current information is the cod i fication of the law, the problem of keeping
the law plain, clear, and accessible to all.

(iii) Representation.—The selection of representatives and agents, to act in
the collective interest in harmony with the general will be based on this
education and plain information.

(iv) *The Executive.—The appointment* of executive agents and the
maintenance of means for keeping them responsible to the community, without at
the same time hampering intelligent initiatives.

(v) *Thought and Research* .— The systematic criticism of affairs and
laws to provide data for popular judgments, and through those judgments to
ensure the secular improvement of the human organization.

These are the five heads under which the broad problem of human society
presents itself to us. In the world around us we see makeshift devices at work
in all those branches, ill coordinated one with another and unsatisfactory in
themselves. We see an educational system meanly financed and equipped, badly
organized and crippled by the interventions and hostilities of religious bodies;
we see popular information supplied chieflyby a venal press dependant upon
advertisements and subsidies; we see farcical methods of election, returning
politicians to power as unrepresentative as any hereditary ruler or casual
conqueror; everywhere the executive is more or less influenced or controlled by
groups of rich adventurers, and the pursuit of political and social science and
of public criticism is still the work of devoted and eccentric individuals
rather than a recognized and honoured function in the state. There is a gigantic
task before right-thinking men in the cleansing and sweetening of the
politician's stable; and until it is done, any complete realization, of
socialism is impossible. While private adventurers control the political life of
the state, it is ridiculous to think of the state taking over collective
economic interests from private adventurers.

Not only has the socialist movement failed thus far to produce a
scientifically reasoned scheme for the correlation of education, law, and the
exercise of public power, but even in the economic field, as we have already
pointed out, creative forces wait for the conception of a right organization of
credit and a right method of payment and interchange. It is a truism that the
willingness of the worker depends, among other things, upon his complete
confidence in. the purchasing power of the currency in which he is paid. As this
confidence goes, work ceases, except in so far as it can be rewarded by payment
in goods. But there is no sufficient science of currency and business psychology
to restrain governments from the most disturbing interferences with the public
credit and with the circulation. And such interferences lead straight to the
cessation of work, that is, of the production of necessary things. Upon such
vital practical questions it is scarcely too much to say that the mass of those
socialists who would recast the world have no definite ideas at all. Yet in a
socialist world quite as much as in any other sort of world, people must be paid
money for their work rather than be paid in kind if any such thing as personal
freedom is to continue. Here, too, there must be an ascertainable right thing to
do. Until that is determined, history in these matters will continue to be not
so much a record of experiments as of flounderings.

And in another direction the social and political thinking of the nineteenth
century was, in the face of the vastness of the mechanical revolution, timid,
limited, and insufficient and that was in regard to international relations. The
reader of socialistic literature will find the socialists constantly writing and
talking of the «State», and never betraying any realization that the «State»
might be all sorts of organizations in all sorts of areas, from the republic of
Sari Marino to the British Empire. It is true that Karl Marx had a conception of
a solidarity of interests between the workers in all the industrialized
countries, but there is little or no suggestion in Marxist socialism of the
logical corollary of this, the establishment of a democratic world federal
government (with national or provincial «state» governments) as a natural
consequence of his projected social revolution. At most there is a vague
aspiration. But if there is any logic about the Marxist, it should be his
declared political end for which he should work without ceasing. Put to the test
of the war of 1914, the socialists of almost all the European countries showed
that their class-conscious internationalism was veneered very thinly indeed over
their patriotic feelings, and had to no degree replaced them. Everywhere during
the German war socialists denounced that war as made by capitalist governments,
but it produces little or no permanent effect to denounce a government or a
world system unless you have a working idea of a better government and a better
system to replace it.

We state these things here because they are facts, and a living and necessary
part of a contemporary survey of human history. It is not our task either to
advocate or controvert socialism. But it is in our picture to note that
political and social life are, and must remain, chaotic and disastrous without
the development of some such constructive scheme as socialisms *ketches*
and to point out clearly how far away the world is at present from any such
scheme. An enormous amount of intellectual toil and discussion and education and
many years—whether decades or centuries, no man can tell—must intervene before a
new order, planned as ships and railways are planned, runs, as the cables and
the postal deliveries run, over the whole surface of our earth. And until such a
new order draws mankind together with its net, human life, as we shall presently
show by the story of the European wars since 1854, must become more and more
casual, dangerous, miserable, anxious, and disastrous because of the continually
more powerful and destructive war methods the continuing mechanical revolution
produces.

