
38.9 The (Second) Scramble for Overseas Empires
========================================================================

.. _Figure 976:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0976.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0976.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 976

    Figure 976: Comparative Maps of Asia

    —(a) As part of hemisphere, (b) Mercator's projection; to show the relative sizes of Asiatic Russia and India in the two cases.

We have suggested that in the political history of Europe between 1848 and
1878, the mechanical revolution was, not yet producing any very revolutionary
changes. The post- revolutionary Great Powers were still going on within
boundaries of practically the same size and with much the same formalities as
they had done in pre-revolutionary times. But where the increased speed and
certainty of transport and telegraphic communications were already producing
very considerable changes of condition and method, was in the overseas
enterprises of Britain and the other European powers, and in the reaction of
Asia and Africa to Europe.

The end of the eighteenth century was a period of disrupting empires and
disillusioned expansionists. The long and tedious journey between Britain and
Spain and their colonies in America prevented any really free coming and going
between the home land and the daughter lands, and go the colonies separated into
new and distinct communities, with distinctive ideas and interests and even
modes of speech. As they grew they strained more and more at the feeble and
uncertain link of shipping that joined them. Weak trading-posts in the
wilderness, like those of France in Canada, or trading establishments in great
alien communities, like those of Britain in India, might well cling for bare
existence to the nation which gave them support and a reason for their
existence. That much and no more seemed to many thinkers in the early part of
the nineteenth century to be the limit set to overseas rule. In 1820 the sketchy
great European «empires» outside of Europe that had figured so bravely in the
maps of the middle eighteenth century, had shrunken to very small dimensions.
Only the Russian sprawled as large as ever across Asia. It sprawled much larger
in the imaginations of many Europeans than in reality, because of their habit of
studying the geography of the World upon Mercator's projection, which enormously
exaggerated the size of Siberia.

The British Empire in 1815 consisted of the thinly populated coastal river
and lake regions of Canada, and a great hinterland of wilderness in which the
only settlements as yet were the fur-trading stations of the Hudson Bay Company,
about a third of the Indian peninsula, under the rule of the East India Company,
the coast districts of the Cape of Good Hope inhabited by blacks and
rebellious-spirited Dutch settlers; a few trading stations on the coast of West
Africa, the rock of Gibraltar, the island of Malta, Jamaica, a few minor
slave-labour possessions in the West Indies, British Guiana in South America,
and, on the other side of the world, two dumps for convicts at Botany Bay in
Australia and in Tasmania.

.. _Figure 978:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0978.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0978.png
    :figclass: full-figure
    :width: 600px
    :alt: Figure 978

    Figure 978: Map — The British Empire in 1815

Spain retained Cuba and a few settlements in the Philippine Islands. Portugal
had in Africa some vestiges of her ancient claims. Holland had various islands
and possessions in the East Indies and Dutch Guiana, and Denmark an island or so
in the West Indies. France had one or two West Indian Islands and French Guiana.
This seemed to be as much as the European powers needed, or were likely to
acquire of the rest of the world. Only the East India Company showed any spirit
of expansion.

In India, as we have already told, a peculiar empire was being built up, not
by the British peoples, nor by the British Government, but by this company of
private adventurers with their monopoly and royal charter. The company had been
forced to become a military and political power during the years of Indian
division and insecurity that followed the breakup of India after the death of
Auraugzeb in 1707. It had learnt to trade in states and peoples during the
eighteenth century. Clive founded, Warren Hastings organized, this strange new
sort of empire; French rivalry was defeated, as we have already told; and by
1798, Lord Mornington, afterwards the Marquis Wellesley, the elder brother of
that General Wellesley who became the Duke of Wellington, became
Governor-General of India, and set the policy of the company definitely upon the
line of replacing the fading empire of the Great Mogul by its own rule.
Napoleon's expedition to Egypt was a direct attack upon the empire of this
British company. While Europe was busy with the Napoleonic wars, the East India
Company, under a succession of governors-general, was playing much the same role
in India that had been played before by Turkoman and such-like invaders from the
north, but playing it with a greater efficiency and far less violence and
cruelty. And after the peace of Vienna it went on, levying its revenues, making
wars, sending ambassadors to Asiatic powers, a quasi-independent state, a state,
however, with a marked disposition to send wealth westward.

In a previous chapter we have sketched the break-up of the empire of the
Great Mogul and the appearance of the Mahratta states, the Rajput
principalities, the Moslem kingdoms of Oudh and Bengal, and the Sikhs. We cannot
tell here in any detail how the British company made its way to supremacy
sometimes as the ally of this power, sometimes as that, and finally as the
conqueror of all. Its power spread to Assam, Sind, Oudh. The map of India began
to take on the outlines familiar to the English schoolboy of to-day, a patchwork
of native states embraced and held together by the great provinces under direct
British rule. . . .

Now as this strange unprecedented empire of the company grew in the period
between 1800 and 1858, the mechanical revolution was quietly abolishing the
great distance that had once separated India and Britain. In the old days the
rule of the company had interfered little in the domestic life of the Indian
states; it had given India foreign overlords, but India was used to foreign
overlords, and had hitherto assimilated them; these Englishmen came into the
country young, lived there most of their lives, and became a part of its system.
But now the mechanical revolution began to alter this state of affairs. It
became easier for the British officials to go home and to have holidays in
Europe, easier for them to bring out wives and families; they ceased to be
Indianized; they remained more conspicuously foreign and western—and there were
more of them. And they began to interfere more vigorously with Indian customs.
Magical and terrible things like the telegraph and the railway arrived.
Christian missions became offensively busy. If they did not make very many
converts, at least they made sceptics among the adherents of the older faiths.
The young men in the towns began to be «Europeanized» to the great dismay of
their elders.

India had endured many changes of rulers before, but never the sort of
changes in her ways that these things portended. The Moslem teachers and the
Brahmins were alike alarmed, and the British were blamed for the progress of
mankind. Conflicts of economic interests grew more acute with the increasing
nearness of Europe; Indian industries, and particularly the ancient cotton
industry, suffered from legislation that favoured the British manufacturer. A
piece of incredible folly on the part of the company precipitated an outbreak.
To the Brahmin a cow is sacred; to the Moslem the pig is unclean. A new rifle,
needing greased cartridges—which the men had to bite—was served out to the
company's Indian soldiers; the troops discovered that their cartridges were
greased with the fat of cows and swine. This discovery precipitated a revolt of
the company's Indian army, the Indian Mutiny (1857). First the troops mutinied
at Meerut. Then Delhi rose to restore the empire of the Great Mogul. . . .

The British public suddenly discovered India. They became aware of that
little garrison of British people, far away in that strange land of fiery dust
and weary sunshine, fighting for life against dark multitudes of assailants. How
they got there and what right they had there, the British public did not ask.
The love of one's kin in danger overrides such questions. There were massacres
and cruelties. 1857 was a year of passionate anxiety in Great Britain. With mere
handfuls of troops the British leaders, and notably Lawrence and Nicholson, did
amazing things. They did not sit down to be besieged while the mutineers
organized and gathered prestige; that would have lost them India for ever. They
attacked often against overwhelming odds. «Clubs, not spades, are, trumps», said
Lawrence. The Sikhs, the Gurkhas, the Punjab troops stuck to the British. The
south remained tranquil. Of the massacres of Cawnpore, and Lucknow in Oudh, and
how a greatly outnumbered force of British troops besieged and stormed Delhi,
other histories must tell. By April, 1859, the last embers of the blaze had been
stamped out, and the British were masters of India again. In no sense had the
mutiny been a popular insurrection; it was a mutiny merely of the Bengal Army,
due largely to the unimaginative rule of the company officials. Its story
abounds in instances of Indian help and kindness to British fugitives. But it
was a warning.

The direct result of the mutiny was the annexation of the Indian Empire to
the British Crown. By the Act entitled *An Act for the Better Government of
India,* the Governor-General became a Viceroy representing the Sovereign, and
the place of the company was taken by a Secretary of State for India responsible
to the British Parliament. In 1877, Lord Beaconsfield, to complete this work,
caused Queen Victoria to be proclaimed Empress of India.

Upon, these extraordinary lines India and Britain are linked at the present
time. India is still the empire of the Great Mogul, expanded, but the Great
Mogul has been replaced by the «crowned republic» of Great Britain. India is an
autocracy without an autocrat. Its rule combines the disadvantage of absolute
monarchy with the impersonality and irresponsibility of democratic officialdom.
The Indian with a complaint to make has no visible monarch to go to; his Emperor
is a golden symbol; he must circulate pamphlets in England or inspire a question
in the British House of Commons. The more occupied Parliament is with British
affairs, the less attention India will receive, and, the more she will be at the
mercy of her small group of higher officials.

This is manifestly impossible as a permanent state of affairs. Indian life,
whatever its restraints, is moving forward with the rest of the world; India has
an increasing service of newspapers, an increasing number of educated people
affected by Western ideas, and ail increasing sense of a common grievance
against her government. There has been little or no corresponding advance in the
education and quality of the British official in India during the past seventy
years. His tradition is a high one; he is often a man of exceptional quality,
but the system is unimaginative and inflexible. Moreover, the military power
that stands behind these officials has developed neither in character nor
intelligence during the last century. No other class has been so stagnant
intellectually as the British military caste. Confronted with a more educated
India, the British military man, uneasily aware of his educational defects and
constantly apprehensive of ridicule, has in the last few years displayed a
disposition towards spasmodic violence that has had some very lamentable
results. For a time the great war altogether diverted what small amount of
British public attention was previously given to India, and drew away the more
intelligent military men from her service. During those years, and the feverish
years of unsettlement that followed, things occurred in India, the massacre of
an unarmed crowd at Amritzar in which nearly two thousand people were killed or
wounded, floggings and humiliating outrages, a sort of official's Terror, that
produced a profound moral shock when at last the Hunter Commission of 1919
brought them before the home public. In liberal-minded Englishmen, who have been
wont to regard their empire as an incipient league of free peoples, this
revelation of the barbaric quality in its administrators produced a very
understandable dismay. . . .

But the time has not yet come for writing the chapter of history that India
is opening for herself. . . . We cannot discuss here in detail the still
unsettled problems of the new India that struggles into being. Already in the
Government of India Act of 1919 we may have the opening of a new and happier era
that may culminate in a free and willing group of Indian peoples taking an equal
place among the confederated states of the world. . . .

The growth of the British Empire in directions other than that of India was
by no means so rapid during the earlier half of the nineteenth century. A
considerable school of political thinkers in Britain was disposed to regard
overseas possessions as a source of weakness to the kingdom. The Australian
settlements developed slowly until in 1842 the discovery of valuable copper
mines, and in 1851 of gold, gave them a new importance. Improvements in
transport were also making Australian wool an increasingly marketable commodity
in Europe. Canada, too, was not remarkably progressive until 1849; it was
troubled by dissensions between its French and British inhabitants, there were
several serious revolts, and it was only in 1867 that a new constitution
creating a Federal Dominion of Canada relieved its internal strains. It was the
railway that altered the Canadian outlook. It enabled Canada, just as it enabled
the United States, to expand westward, to market its corn and other produce in
Europe, and in spite of its swift and extensive growth, to remain in language
and sympathy and interests one community. The railway, the steamship, and the
telegraphic cable were indeed changing all the conditions of colonial
development.

Before 1840, English settlements had already begun in New Zealand, and a New
Zealand Land Company had been formed to exploit the possibilities of the island.
In 1840 New Zealand also was added to the colonial possessions of the British
Crown.

Canada, as we have noted, was the first of the British possessions to respond
richly to the new economic possibilities the new methods of transport were
opening. Presently the republics of South America, and particularly the
Argentine Republic, began to feel, in their cattle trade and coffee growing, the
increased nearness of the European market. Hitherto the chief commodities that
had attracted the European powers into unsettled and barbaric regions had been
gold or other metals, spices, ivory, or slaves. But in the latter quarter of the
nineteenth century the increase of the European populations was obliging their
governments to look abroad for staple foods; and the growth of scientific
industrialism was creating a demand for new raw materials, fats and greases of
every kind, rubber, and other hitherto disregarded substances. It was plain that
Great Britain and Holland and Portugal were reaping a great and growing
commercial advantage from their very considerable control of tropical and
sub-tropical products. After 1871 Germany and presently France and later Italy
began to look for unannexed raw-material areas, or for Oriental countries
capable of profitable modernization.

.. _Figure 985:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0985.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0985.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 985

    Figure 985: Africa about the middle of the 19th century

So began a fresh scramble all over the world, except in the American region
where the Monroe Doctrine now barred such adventures, for politically
unprotected lands. Close to Europe was the continent of Africa, full of vaguely
known possibilities. In 1850 it was a continent of black mystery; only Egypt and
the coast were known. A map must show the greatness of the European ignorance at
that time. It would need a book as long as this *Outline* to do justice to
the amazing story of the explorers and adventurers who first pierced this cloud
of darkness, and to the political agents, administrators, traders, settlers, and
scientific men who followed in their track. Wonderful races of men like the
pigmies, strange beasts like the okapi, marvellous fruits and flowers and
insects, terrible diseases, astounding scenery of forest and mountain, enormous
inland seas and gigantic rivers and cascades were revealed; a whole new world.
Even remains (at Zimbabwe) of some unrecorded and vanished civilization, the
southward enterprise of an early people, were discovered. Into this new world
came the Europeans, and found the rifle already there in the hands of the Arab
slave-traders, and negro life in disorder. By 1900, as our second map must show,
all Africa was mapped, explored, estimated, and divided between the European
powers, divided with much snarling and disputation into portions that left each
power uneasy or discontented. Little heed was given to the welfare of the
natives in this scramble. The Arab slaver was indeed curbed rather than
expelled, but the greed for rubber, which was a wild product collected under
compulsion by the natives in the Belgian Congo, a greed exacerbated by the
pitiless avarice of the King of the Belgians, and the clash of inexperienced
European administrators with the native population in many other annexations,
led to horrible atrocities. No European power has perfectly clean hands in this
matter.

We cannot tell here in any detail how Great Britain got possession of Egypt
in 1883, and remained there in spite of the fact that Egypt was technically a
part of the Turkish Empire, nor how nearly this scramble led to war between
France and Great Britain in 1898, when a certain Colonel Marchand, crossing
Central Africa from the west coast, tried at Fashoda to seize the Upper Nile. In
Uganda the French Catholic and the British Anglican missionaries disseminated a
form of Christianity so heavily charged with the spirit of Napoleon, and so
finely insistent upon the nuances of doctrine, that a few years after its first
glimpse of European civilization, Mengo, the capital of Uganda, was littered
with dead «Protestants» and «Catholics» extremely difficult to distinguish from
the entirely unspiritual warriors of the old régime.

.. _Figure 986:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0986.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0986.png
    :figclass: full-figure
    :width: 600px
    :alt: Figure 986

    Figure 986: Africa, 1914

Nor can we tell how the British Government first let the Boers, or Dutch
settlers, of the Orange River district and the Transvaal set up independent
republics in the inland parts of South Africa, and then repented and annexed the
Transvaal Republic in 1877; nor how the Transvaal Boers fought for freedom and
won it after the Battle of Majuba Hill (1881). Majuba Hill was made to rankle in
the memory of the English people by a persistent press campaign. A war with both
republics broke out in 1899, a three years' war enormously costly to the British
people, which ended at last in the surrender of the two republics.

Their period of subjugation was a brief one. In 1907, after the downfall of
the imperialist government which had conquered them, the Liberals took the South
African problem in hand, and these former republics became free and fairly
willing associates with Cape Colony and Natal in a confederation of all the
states of South Africa as one self-governing republic under the British
Crown.

In a quarter of a century the partition of Africa was completed. There
remained unannexed three comparatively small countries: Liberia, a settlement of
liberated negro slaves on the west coast; Morocco, under a Moslem Sultan; and
Abyssinia, a barbaric country, with an ancient and peculiar form of
Christianity, which had successfully maintained its independence against Italy
at the Battle of Adowa in 1896.

