13.3 The Semitic Languages
================================================================

Next to Aryan, philologists distinguish another group of languages which seem
to have been made quite separately from the Aryan languages, the Semitic.
Hebrew and Arabic are kindred, but they seem to have even a different set of
root words from the Aryan tongues; they express their ideas of relationship
in a different way; the fundamental ideas of their grammars are generally
different. They were in all probability made by human communities quite out
of touch with the Aryans, separately and independently. Hebrew, Arabic,
Abyssinian, ancient Assyrian, ancient Phoenician, and a number of associated
tongues are put together, therefore, as being derived from a second primary
language, which is called the SEMITIC. In the very beginnings of recorded
history we find Aryan-speaking peoples and Semitic-speaking peoples carrying
on the liveliest intercourse of war and trade round and about the eastern end
of the Mediterranean, but the fundamental differences of the primary Aryan
and primary Semitic languages oblige us to believe that in early Neolithic
times, before the historical period, there must for thousands of years have
been an almost complete separation of the Aryan-speaking and the Semitic-
speaking peoples. The latter seem to have lived either in south Arabia or in
north-east Africa. In the opening centuries of the Neolithic Age, the
original Aryan speakers and the original Semitic speakers were probably
living, so to speak, in different worlds with a minimum of intercourse.
Racially, it would seem, they had a remote common origin; both Aryan speakers
and Semites are classed as Caucasians; but while the original Aryan speakers
seem to have been of Nordic race, the original Semites were rather of the
Mediterranean type.

