13.4 The Hamitic Languages
================================================================

.. admonition:: Editor's Note

    Hamitic is an obsolete ethno-linguistic classification of some ethnic groups
    within the Afro-Asiatic (previously termed "Hamito-Semitic") language family.
    These populations were also termed the Hamitic race throughout the 19th
    century and most of the 20th century.
    `Read more at Wikipedia.`_

.. _Read more at Wikipedia.: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hamitic

Philologists speak with less unanimity of a third group of languages, the
HAMITIC, which some declare to be distinct from, and others allied to, the
Semitic. The weight of opinion inclines now towards the idea of some
primordial connection of these two groups. The Hamitic group is certainly a
much wider and more various language group than the Semitic or the Aryan, and
the Semitic tongues are more of a family, have more of a common likeness,
than the Aryan. The Semitic languages may have arisen as some specialized
proto-Hamitic group, just as the birds arose from a special group of reptiles
(:doc:`Chapter 5 <../50-the-age-of-reptiles/53-the-first-birds>`).
It is a tempting speculation, but one for which there is
really no basis of justifying fact, to suppose that the rude primordial
ancestor group of the Aryan tongues branched off from the proto-Hamitic
speech forms at some still earlier date than the separation and
specialization of Semitic. The Hamitic speakers today, like the Semitic
speakers, are mainly of the Mediterranean Caucasian race. Among the Hamitic
languages are the ancient Egyptian and Coptic, the Berber languages (of the
mountain people of North Africa, the Masked Tuaregs, and other such peoples),
and what are called the Ethiopic group of African languages in eastern
Africa, including the speech of the Gallas and the Somalis. The general
grouping of these various tongues suggests that they originated over some
great area to the west, as the primitive Semitic may have arisen to the east,
of the Red Sea divide. That divide was probably much more effective in
Pleistocene times; the sea extended across to the west of the Isthmus of
Suez, and a great part of lower Egypt was under water. Long before the dawn
of history, however, Asia and Africa had joined at Suez, and these two
language systems were in contact in that region. And if Asia and Africa were
separated then at Suez, they may, on the other hand, have been joined by way
of Arabia and Abyssinia.

These Hamitic languages may have radiated from a centre on the African coast
of the Mediterranean, and they may have extended over the then existing land
connections very widely into western Europe.

All these three great groups of languages, it may be noted, the Aryan,
Semitic, and Hamitic, have one feature in common which they do not share with
any other language, and that is grammatical gender; but whether that has much
weight as evidence of a remote common origin of Aryan, Semitic, and Hamitic,
is a question for the philologist rather than for the general student. It
does not affect the clear evidence of a very long and very ancient
prehistoric separation of the speakers of these three diverse groups of
tongues.

The bulk of the Semitic and Hamitic-speaking peoples are put by ethnologists
with the Aryans among the Caucasian group of races. They are "white". The
Semitic and Nordic "races" have a much more distinctive physiognomy; they
seem, like their characteristic languages, to be more marked and specialized
than the Hamitic-speaking peoples.
