13.7 Other Language Groups
================================================================

In addition, the following other great language families are distinguished by
the philologist. All the American-Indian languages, which vary widely among
themselves, are separable from any Old World group. Here we may lump them
together not so much as a family as a miscellany. There is one great group of
languages in Africa, from a little way north of the equator to its southern
extremity, the BANTU and in addition a complex of other languages across the
centre of the continent about which we will not trouble here. There are also
two probably separate groups, the DRAVIDIAN in South India, and the MALAY-
POLYNESIAN stretched over Polynesia, and also now including Indian tongues.

Now it seems reasonable to conclude from these fundamental differences that
about the time when men were beginning to form rather larger communities than
the family tribe, when they were beginning to tell each other long stories
and argue and exchange ideas, human beings were distributed about the world
in a number of areas which communicated very little with each other. They
were separated by oceans, seas, thick forests, deserts or mountains from one
another. There may have been in that remote time, it may be 15,000 years ago
or more, Aryan, Semitic, Hamitic, Turanian, American and Chinese-speaking
tribes and families, wandering over their several areas of hunting and
pasture, all at very much the same stage of culture, and each developing its
linguistic instrument in its own way. Probably each of these original tribes
was not more numerous altogether than the Indians in Hudson Bay Territory
today. Systematic agriculture was barely beginning then, and until
agriculture made a denser population possible men may have been almost as
rare as the great apes have always been. If agriculture was becoming at all
important in human life at that time, and if population was anywhere denser,
it was probably in the Mediterranean region and possibly in areas now
submerged.

In addition to these Neolithic tribes, there must have been various still
more primitive forest folks in Africa and in India. Central Africa, from the
Upper Nile, was then a vast forest, impenetrable to ordinary human life, a
forest of which the Congo forests of today are the last shrunken remains.

Possibly the spread of men of a race higher than primitive Australoids into
the East Indies,\ [#fn3]_ and the development of the languages of the Malay-
Polynesian type came later in time than the origination of these other
language groups.

The language divisions of the philologist do tally, it is manifest, in a
broad sort of way with the main race classes of the ethnologist, and they
carry out the same idea of age-long separations between great divisions of
mankind. In the Glacial Age, ice, or at least a climate too severe for the
free spreading of peoples, extended from the north pole into Central Europe
and across Russia and Siberia to the great tablelands of Central Asia. After
the last Glacial Age, this cold north mitigated its severities very slowly,
and was for long without any other population than the wandering hunters who
spread eastward and across Bering Strait. North and Central Europe and Asia
did not become sufficiently temperate for agriculture until quite recent
times, times that is within the limit of 12,000 or possibly even 10,000
years, and a dense forest period intervened between the age of the hunter and
the agricultural clearings.

This forest period was also a very wet period. It has been called the Pluvial
or Lacustrine Age, the rain or pond period. It has to be remembered that the
outlines of the land of the world have changed greatly even in the last
hundred centuries. Across European Russia, from the Baltic to the Caspian
Sea, as the ice receded there certainly spread much water and many impassable
swamps; the Caspian Sea and the Sea of Aral and parts of the Desert of
Turkestan, are the vestiges of a great extent of sea that reached far up to
the Volga valley and sent an arm westward to join the Black Sea. Mountain
barriers much higher than they are now, and the arm of the sea that is now
the region of the Indus, completed the separation of the early Nordic races
from the Mongolians and the Dravidians, and made the broad racial
differentiation of those groups possible.

Again the blown-sand Desert of Sahara — it is not a dried-up sea, but a wind
desert, and was once fertile and rich in life — becoming more and more dry
and sandy, cut the Caucasians off from the sparse primitive Negro population
in the central forest region of Africa.

The Persian Gulf extended very far to the north of its present head, and
combined with the Syrian desert to cut off the Semitic peoples from the
eastern areas, while on the other hand the south of Arabia, much more fertile
than it is today, may have reached across what is now the Gulf of Aden
towards Abyssinia and Somaliland. The Mediterranean and Red Sea may even have
been fertile valleys containing a string of freshwater lakes during the
Pluvial Age. The Himalayas and the higher and vaster massif of Central Asia
and the northward extension of the Bay of Bengal up to the present Ganges
valley divided off the Dravidians from the Mongolians, the canoe was the
chief link between Dravidian and Southern Mongol, and the Gobi system of seas
and lakes which presently became the Gobi desert, and the great system of
mountain chains which follow one another across Asia from the centre to the
northeast, split the Mongolian races into the Chinese and the Ural-Altaic
language groups.

Bering Strait, when this came into existence, before or after the Pluvial
Period, isolated the Amerindians.

We are not suggesting here, be it noted, that these ancient separations were
absolute separations, but that they were effectual enough at least to prevent
any great intermixture of blood or any great intermixture of speech in those
days of man's social beginnings. There was, nevertheless, some amount of
meeting and exchange even then, some drift of knowledge that spread the crude
patterns and use of various implements, and the seeds of a primitive
agriculture about the world.

.. [#fn3] The Polynesians appear to be a later eastward extension of the dark whites or brown peoples.
