32.1 The Western World at its Lowest Ebb
========================================================================
Let us turn again now from this intellectual renascence in the cradle of the
ancient civilizations to the affairs of the Western world. We have described the
complete economic, social, and political break-up of the Roman imperial system
in the west, the confusion and darkness that followed in the sixth and seventh
centuries, and the struggles of such men as Cassiodorus to keep alight the flame
of human learning amidst these windy confusions. For a time it would be idle to
write of states and rulers. Smaller or greater adventurers seized a castle or a
countryside and ruled an uncertain area. The British Islands, for instance, were
split up amidst a multitude of rulers; numerous Keltic chiefs in Ireland and
Scotland and Wales and Cornwall fought and prevailed over and succumbed to each
other; the English invaders were also divided into a number of fluctuating
«kingdoms», Kent, Wessex, Essex, Sussex, Mercia, Northumbria, and East Anglia,
which were constantly at war with one another. So it was over most of the
Western world. Here a bishop would be the monarch, as Gregory the Great was in
Rome; here a town or a group of towns would be under the rule of the duke or
prince of this or that. Amidst the vast ruins of the city of Rome
half-independent families of quasi-noble adventurers and their retainers
maintained themselves, The Pope kept a sort of general predominance there, but
he was sometimes more than balanced by a «Duke of Rome». The great arena of the
Colosseum had been made into a privately-owned castle, and so, too, had the vast
circular tomb of the Emperor Hadrian; and the adventurers who had possession of
these strongholds and their partisans waylaid each other and fought and bickered
in the ruinous streets of the once imperial city. The tomb of Hadrian was known
after the days of Gregory the Great as the Castle of St. Angelo, the Castle of
the Holy Angel, because when he was crossing the bridge over the Tiber on his
way to St. Peter's to pray against the great pestilence which was devastating
the city, he had had a vision of a great angel standing over the dark mass of
the mausoleum and sheathing a sword, and he had known then that his prayers
would be answered. This Castle of St. Angelo played a very important part in
Roman affairs during this age of disorder.

Spain was in much the same state of political fragmentation as Italy or
France or Britain; and in Spain the old feud of Carthaginian and Roman was still
continued in the bitter hostility of their descendants and heirs, the Jew and
the Christian. So that when the power of the Caliph had swept along the North
African coast to the Straits of Gibraltar, it found in the Spanish Jews ready
helpers in its invasion of Europe. A Moslem army of Arabs and of Berbers, the
-nomadic Hamitic people of the African desert and mountain hinterland who had
been converted to Islam, crossed and defeated the West Goths in a great battle
in 711. In a few Years the whole country was in their possession.

In 720 Islam had reached the Pyrenees, and had pushed round their eastern end
into France; and for a time it seemed that the faith was likely to subjugate
Gaul as easily as it had subjugated the Spanish peninsula. But presently it
struck against something hard, a new kingdom of the Franks, which had been
consolidating itself for some two centuries in the Rhineland and North
France.

Of this Frankish kingdom, the precursor of France and Germany, which formed
the western bulwark of Europe against the faith of Muhammad, as the Byzantine
empire behind the Taurus Mountains formed the eastern, we shall now have much to
tell; but first we must give some account of the new system of social groupings
out of which it arose.

