
32.10 The Crusades
========================================================================

.. _Figure 641:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0641.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0641.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 641

    Figure 641: Map — The First Crusade

From the very first this flaming enthusiasm was mixed with baser elements.
There was the cold and calculated scheme of the free and ambitious Latin Church
to subdue and replace the emperor-ruled Byzantine Church; there, was the
freebooting instinct of the Normans, who were tearing Italy to pieces, which
turned readily enough to a new and richer world of plunder; and there was
something in the multitude who now turned their faces east, something deeper
than love in the human composition, namely, fear-born hate, that the impassioned
appeals of the propagandists and the exaggeration of the horrors and cruelties
of the infidel had fanned into flame. And there was still other forces; the
intolerant Seljuks and the intolerant Fatimites lay now an impassable barrier
across the eastward trade of Genoa and Venice that had hitherto flowed through
Bagdad and Aleppo, or through Egypt. They must force open these closed channels,
unless Constantinople and the Black Sea route were to monopolize Eastern trade
altogether. Moreover, in 1094 and 1095 there had been a pestilence and famine
from the Scheldt to Bohemia, and there was great social disorganization. «No
wonder», says Mr. Earnest Darker, «that a stream of emigration set towards the
East, such as would in modern times flow towards a newly discovered goldfield—a
stream carrying in its turbid waters much refuse, tramps and bankrupts,
campfollowers and hucksters, fugitive monks and escaped villeins, and marked by
the same motley grouping, the same fever of life, the same alternations of
affluence and beggary, which mark the rush for a goldfield to-day».

But these were secondary contributory causes. The fact, of predominant
interest to the historian of mankind is this will *to crusade* suddenly
revealed as a new mass possibility in human affairs.

The story of the crusades abounds, in such romantic and picturesque detail
that the writer of an Outline of History must ride his pen upon the curb through
this alluring field. The first forces to move eastward were great crowds of
undisciplined people rather than armies, and they sought to make their way by
the valley of the Danube, and thence southward to Constantinople. This was the
«people's crusade». Never before in the whole history of the world had there
been such a spectacle as these masses of practically leaderless people moved by
an idea. It was a very crude idea. When they got among foreigners, they do not
seem to have realized that they were not already among the infidel. Two great
mobs, the advance guard of the expedition, committed such excesses in Hungary,
where the language must have been incomprehensible to them, as to provoke the
Hungarians to destroy them. They were massacred. A third host began with a great
pogrom of the Jews in the Rhineland for the Christian blood was up-and this
multitude was also dispersed in Hungary. Two other hosts under Peter got through
and reached Constantinople, to the astonishment and dismay of the Emperor
Alexius. They looted and committed outrages as they came, and at last he shipped
them across the Bosphorus, to be massacred rather than defeated by the Seljuks
(1096).

This first unhappy appearance of the «people» as people in modern European
history was followed in 1097 by the organized forces of the First Crusade. They
came by diverse routes from France, Normandy, Flanders, England, Southern Italy
and Sicily, and the will and power of them were the Normans. They crossed the
Bosphorus and captured Nicaea, which Alexius snatched away from them before they
could loot it. They then went by much the same route as Alexander the Great,
through the Cilician Gates, leaving the Turks in Konia unconquered, past the
battlefield of the Issus, and so to Antioch, which they took after nearly a
year's siege. Then they defeated a great relieving army from. Mosul. A large
part of the Crusaders remained in Antioch, a smaller force under Godfrey of
Bouillon (in Belgium) went on to Jerusalem. «After a little more than a month's
siege, the city was finally captured (July 15). The slaughter was terrible; the
blood of the conquered ran down the streets, until men splashed in blood as they
rode. At nightfall, 'sobbing for excess of joy,' the crusaders came to the
Sepulchre from their treading of the winepress, and put their blood-stained
hands together in prayer. So, on that day of July, the First Crusade came to an
end».\ [#fn13]_ 

The authority of the Patriarch of Jerusalem was at once seized upon by the
Latin clergy with the expedition, and the Orthodox Christians found themselves
in rather a worse case under Latin rule than under the Turk.

There were already Latin principalities established at Antioch and Edessa,
and there began a struggle for ascendancy between these various courts and
kings, and an unsuccessful attempt to make Jerusalem a property of the Pope.
These are complications beyond our present scope.

Let us quote however, a characteristic passage from Gibbon:

    «In a style less grave than that of history, I should perhaps compare the
    Emperor Alexius to the jackal, who is said to follow the steps and to devour the
    leavings of the lion. Whatever had been his fears and toils in the passage of
    the First Crusade, they were amply recompensed by the subsequent benefits which
    be derived from the exploits of the Franks. His dexterity and vigilance secured
    their first conquest of Nicaea, and from this threatening station the Turks were
    compelled to evacuate the neighbourhood of Constantinople. While the Crusaders,
    with blind valour, advanced into the midland countries of Asia, the crafty Greek
    improved the favourable occasion when the emirs of the sea coast were recalled
    to the standard of the Sultan. The Turks were driven from the isles of Rhode's
    and Chios; the cities of Ephesus and Smyrna, of Sardes, Philadelphia, and
    Laodicea were restored to the empire, which Alexius, enlarged from the
    Hellespont to the banks of the Maeander and the rocky shores of Pamphylia. The
    churches resumed their splendour; the towns were rebuilt and fortified; and the
    desert country was peopled with colonies of Christians, who were gently removed
    from the more distant and dangerous frontier. In these paternal cares we may
    forgive Alexius, if we forget the deliverance of the holy sepulchre; but. by the
    Latins, he was stigmatized with the foul reproach of treason and desertion. They
    had sworn fidelity and obedience to his throne; but *he* had promised to
    assist their enterprise in person, or at least, with his troops and treasures;
    his base retreat dissolved their obligations; and the sword, which had been the
    instrument of their victory, was the pledge and title of their just
    independence. It does not appear that the emperor attempted to revive his
    obsolete claims over the kingdom of Jerusalem, but the borders of Cilicia, and
    Syria were more recent in his possession and more accessible to his arms. The
    great army of the Crusaders was annihilated or dispersed; the principality of
    Antioch was left without a head, by the surprise and captivity of Bohemond; his
    ransom had oppressed him with a heavy debt; and his Norman followers were
    insufficient to repel the hostilities of the Greeks and Turks. In this distress,
    Bohemond embraced a magnanimous resolution, of leaving the defence of Antioch to
    his kinsman, the faithful Tancred; of arming the West against the Byzantine
    Empire, and of executing the design which he inherited from the lessons and
    example of his father Guiscard. His embarkation was clandestine; and if we may
    credit a tale of the Princess Anna, he passed the hostile sea closely secreted
    in a coffin. (Anna Comnena adds, that to complete the imitation, he was shut up
    with a dead cock; and condescends to wonder how the barbarian could endure the
    confinement and putrefaction. This absurd tale is unknown to the Latins.) But
    his reception in France was dignified by the public applause and his marriage
    with the king's daughter; his return was glorious, since the bravest spirits of
    the age enlisted under his veteran command; and he repassed the Adriatic at the
    head of five thousand horse and forty thousand foot, assembled from the most
    remote climates of Europe. The strength of Durazzo and prudence of Alexius, the
    progress of famine and approach of winter, eluded his ambitious hopes; and the
    venal confederates were seduced from his standard. A treaty of peace suspended
    the fears of the Greeks».

We have dealt thus lengthily with the First Crusade, because it displays
completely the quality of all these expeditions. The reality of the struggle
between the Latin and the Byzantine system became more and more nakedly
apparent. In 1101 came reinforcements, in which the fleet of the mercantile
republics of Venice and Genoa played a prominent part, and the power of the
kingdom of Jerusalem was extended. The year 1147 saw a Second Crusade, in which
both the Emperor Conrad III and King Louis of France participated. It was a much
more stately and far less successful and enthusiastic expedition than its
predecessor. It had been provoked by the fall of Edessa to the Moslems in 1144.
One large division of Germans, instead of going to the Holy Land, attacked and
subjugated the still pagan Wends east of the Elbe. This, the Pope agreed,
counted as crusading, and so did the capture of Lisbon, and the foundation of
the Christian kingdom of Portugal by, the Flemish and English contingents.

In 1169 a Kurdish adventurer, named Saladin, became ruler of Egypt, in which
country the Shiite heresy had now fallen before a Sunnite revival. This Saladin
reunited the, efforts of Egypt and Bagdad, and preached a Jehad, a Holy War, a
counter-crusade, of all the Moslems against the Christians. This Jehad excited
almost as much feeling in Islam as the First Crusade had done in Christendom. It
was now a case of crusader against crusader; and in 1187 Jerusalem was retaken.
This provoked the Third Crusade (1189). This also was a grand affair, planned
jointly by the Emperor Frederick I (known better as Frederick Barbarossa), the
King of France, and the King of England (who at that time owned many of the
fairest French provinces). The papacy played a secondary part in this
expedition; it was in one of its phases of enfeeblement; and the crusade was the
most courtly, chivalrous, and romantic of all. Religious bitterness was
mitigated by the idea of knightly gallantry, which obsessed both Saladin and
Richard I (1189-1199) of England (Coeur-de-Lion), and the lover of romance may
very well turn to the romances about this period for its flavour. The crusade
saved the principality of Antioch for a time but failed to retake Jerusalem. The
Christians, however, remained in possession of the sea-coast of Palestine.

By the time of the Third Crusade, the magic and wonder had gone out of these
movements altogether. The common people had found them out. Men went, but only
kings and nobles straggled back; and that often only after heavy taxation for a
ransom. The idea of the crusades was cheapened by their too frequent and trivial
use. Whenever the Pope quarrelled with anyone now, he called for a crusade,
until the word ceased to mean anything but an attempt to give flavour to an
unpalatable civil war. There was a crusade against the heretics in the south of
France, one against John (King of England), one against the Emperor Frederick
II. The Popes did not understand the necessity of dignity to the papacy. They
had achieved a moral ascendancy in Christendom. Forthwith they began to fritter
it away. They not only cheapened the idea of the crusades, but they made their
tremendous power of excommunication, of putting people outside all the
sacraments, hopes, and comforts of religion, ridiculous by using it in mere
disputes of policy. Frederick II was not only crusaded against, but
excommunicated-without visible injury. He was excommunicated again in 1239, and
his sentence was renewed by Innocent IV in 1245.

The bulk of the Fourth Crusade never reached the Holy Land at all. It started
from Venice (1202), captured Zara, encamped at Constantinople (1203), and
finally, in 1204, stormed the city. It was frankly a combined attack on the
Byzantine Empire. Venice took much of the coasts and islands of the empire, and
a Latin, Baldwin of Flanders, was set up as emperor in Constantinople. The Latin
and Greek Churches were declared to be reunited, and Latin emperors ruled as
conquerors in Constantinople from 1204 to 1261.

In 1212 occurred a dreadful thing, a children's crusade. An excitement that
could no longer affect sane adults was spread among the children in the south of
France and in the Rhone valley. A crowd of many thousands of French boys marched
to Marseilles; they were then lured on board ship by slave traders, who sold
them into slavery in Egypt. The Rhineland children tramped into Italy, many
perishing by the way, and there dispersed. Pope Innocent III made great capital
out of this strange business. «The very children put us to shame», he said; and
sought to whip up enthusiasm for a Fifth Crusade. This crusade aimed at the
conquest of Egypt, because Jerusalem was now held by the Egyptian Sultan; its
remnants returned in 1221, after an inglorious evacuation of its one capture,
Damietta, with the Jerusalem vestiges of the True Cross as a sort of consolation
concession on the part of the victor. We have already noted the earlier
adventures of this venerable relic before the days of Muhammad when it was
carried off by Chosroes II to Ctesiphon, and recovered by the Emperor Heraclius.
Fragments of the True Cross, however, had always been in Rome at the church of
S. Croce-in-Gerusalemme, since the days of the Empress Helena (the mother of
Constantine the Great) to whom, says the legend, its hiding place had been
revealed in a vision during her pilgrimage to the Holy Land.\ [#fn14]_ 

The Sixth Crusade (1229) was a crusade bordering upon absurdity. The Emperor
Frederick II had promised to go upon a crusade, and evaded his vow. He had made
a false start and returned. He was probably bored by the mere idea of a crusade.
But the vow had been part of the bargain by which he secured the support of Pope
Innocent III in his election as emperor. He busied himself in reorganizing the
government of his Sicilian kingdom, though he had given the Pope to understand
that he would relinquish those possessions if he became emperor; and the Pope
was anxious to stop this process of consolidation by sending him to the Holy
Land. The Pope did not want Frederick II, or any German emperor at all in Italy,
because he himself wished to rule Italy. As Frederick II remained evasive,
Gregory IX excommunicated him, proclaimed a crusade against him, and invaded his
dominions in Italy (1228). Whereupon the Emperor sailed with an army to the Holy
Land. There he had a meeting with the Sultan of Egypt (the Emperor spoke six
languages freely, including Arabic); and it would seem these two gentlemen, both
of sceptical opinions, exchanged views of a congenial sort, discussed the Pope
in a worldly spirit, debated the Mongolian rush westward, which threatened them
both alike, and agreed finally to a commercial convention, and the surrender of
a part of the kingdom of Jerusalem to Frederick. This indeed was a new sort of
crusade, a crusade by private treaty. As this astonishing crusader had been
excommunicated, he had to indulge in a purely secular coronation in Jerusalem,
taking the crown from the altar with his own hand, in a church from which all
the clergy had gone. Probably there was no one to show him the Holy Places;
indeed these were presently all put under an interdict by the Patriarch of
Jerusalem and locked up; manifestly the affair differed altogether in spirit
from the red onslaught of the First Crusade. It had not even the kindly
sociability of the Caliph Omar's visit six hundred years before. Frederick II
rode out of Jerusalem almost alone, returned from this unromantic success to
Italy, put his affairs there in order very rapidly, chased the papal armies out
of his possessions, and obliged the Pope to give him absolution from his
excommunication (1230). This Sixth Crusade was indeed not only the *reductio
ad absurdum* of crusades, but of papal excommunications. Of this Frederick II
we shall tell more in a later section, because he was very typical of certain
new forces that were coming into European affairs.

The Christians lost Jerusalem again in 1244; it was taken from them very
easily by the Sultan of Egypt when they attempted an intrigue against him. This
provoked the Seventh Crusade, the Crusade of St. Louis, King of France (Louis
IX), who was taken prisoner in Egypt and ransomed in 1250. Not until 1918, when
it fell to a mixed force of French, British, and Indian troops, did Jerusalem
slip once more from the Moslem grasp. . . .

One more crusade remains to be noted, an expedition to Tunis by this same
Louis IX who died of fever there.

.. [#fn13] E. Barker, art. "Crusades," Encyclopaedia Britannica.

.. [#fn14] "The custody of the True Cross which on Easter Sunday was solemnly exposed to the people, was entrusted to the Bishop of Jerusalem; and he alone might gratify the curious devotion of the pilgrims, by the gift of small pieces, which they encased in gold or gems, and carried away in triumph to their respective countries. But, as this gainful branch of commerce must soon have been annihilated, it was found convenient to suppose, that the marvellous wood possessed a secret power of vegetation, and that its substance, though continually diminished, still remained entire and unimpaired." —Gibbon.
