
32.11 The Crusades, a Test of Christianity
========================================================================
The essential interest of the crusades for the historian of mankind lies in
the wave of emotion, of unifying feeling that animated the first. Thereafter
these expeditions became, more and more an established process, and less and
less vital events. The First Crusade was an occurrence like the discovery of
America; the later ones were more and more like a trip across the Atlantic. In
the eleventh century, the idea of the crusade must have been like a strange and
wonderful light in the sky; in the thirteenth one can imagine honest burghers
saying in tones of protest, «What! *another* crusade!» The experience of
St. Louis in Egypt is not like a fresh experience for mankind; it is much more
like a round of golf over some well-known links, a round that was dogged by
misfortune. It is an insignificant series of events. The interest of life had
shifted to other directions.

The beginning of the crusades displays all Europe saturated by a naive
Christianity, and ready to follow the leading of the Pope trustfully and simply
the scandals of the 'Lateran during its evil days, with which we are all so
familiar now, were practically unknown outside Rome. And Gregory VII and Urban
II had redeemed all that. But intellectually and morally their successors at the
Lateran and the Vatican\ [#fn15]_  were not equal to their opportunities. The
strength, of the papacy lay in the faith men had in it, and it used that faith
so carelessly as to enfeeble it. Rome has always had too much of the shrewdness
of the priest and too little of the power of the prophet. So that while the
eleventh century was a century of ignorant and confiding men, the thirteenth was
an age of knowing and disillusioned men. It was a far more civilized and
profoundly sceptical world.

The bishops, priests, and the monastic institutions of Latin Christendom
before the days of Gregory VII had been perhaps rather loosely linked together
and very variable in quality; but it is clear that they were, as a rule,
intensely intimate with the people among whom they found themselves, and with
much of the spirit of Jesus still alive in them; they were trusted, and they had
enormous power *within the conscience of their followers.* The church, in
comparison with its later state, was more in the hands of local laymen and the
local ruler; it lacked its later universality. The energetic bracing up of the
church organization by Gregory VII which was designed to increase the central
power of Rome, broke many subtle filaments between priest and monastery on the
one hand, and the countryside about them on the other. Men of faith and wisdom
believe in growth and their fellow men; but priests, even such priests as
Gregory VII, believe in the false «efficiency» of an imposed discipline. The
squabble over investitures made every prince in Christendom suspicious of the
bishops as agents of a foreign power; this suspicion filtered down to the
parishes. The political enterprises of the papacy necessitated an increasing
demand for money. Already in the thirteenth century it was being said everywhere
that the priests were not good men, that they were always hunting for money.

In the days of ignorance there had been an extraordinary willingness to
believe the Catholic priesthood good and wise. Relatively it was better and
wiser in those days. Great powers beyond her spiritual functions had been
entrusted to the church, and very extraordinary freedoms.

Of this confidence the fullest advantage had been taken. In the Middle Ages
the church had become a state within the state. It had its own law courts. Cases
involving not merely priests, but monks, students, crusaders, widows, orphans,
and the helpless, were reserved for the clerical courts; and whenever the rites
or rules of the church were involved, there the church claimed jurisdiction over
such matters as wills, marriage, oaths, and of course over heresy, sorcery, and
blasphemy. There were numerous clerical prisons in which offenders might pine
all their lives. The Pope was the supreme law-giver of Christendom, and his
court at Rome the final and decisive court of appeal. And the church levied
taxes; it had not only vast properties, and a great income from fees, but it
imposed a tax of a tenth, the tithe, upon its subjects. It did not call for this
as a pious benefaction; it demanded it as a right. The clergy, on the other
hand, were now claiming exemption from lay taxation.

This attempt to trade upon their peculiar prestige and evade their share in
fiscal burdens was certainly one very considerable factor in the growing
dissatisfaction with the clergy. Apart from any question of justice, it was
impolitic. It made taxes seem ten times more burthensome to those who had to
pay. It made everyone feel the immunities of the church. And a still more
extravagant and unwise claim made by the church was the claim to the power of
*dispensation.* The Pope might in many instances set aside the laws of the
church in individual cases; he might allow cousins to marry, permit a man to
have two wives, or release anyone from a vow. But to do, such things is to admit
that the laws affected are not based upon necessity and an inherent
righteousness; that they are in fact restrictive and vexatious. The law-giver,
of all beings, most owes the law allegiance. He of all men should behave as
though the law compelled him. But it is the universal weakness of mankind that
what we are given to administer we presently imagine we own.

.. [#fn15] The Popes inhabited the palace of the Lateran until 1305, when a French Pope set up the papal court at Avignon. When the Pope returned to Rome in 1377 the Lateran was almost in ruins, and the palace of the Vatican became the seat of the papal court. It was, among other advantages, much nearer to the papal stronghold, the Castle of St. Angelo.
