
32.12 The Emperor Frederick II
========================================================================
The Emperor Frederick II is a very convenient example of the sort of doubter
and rebel the thirteenth century could produce. It may be interesting to tell a
little of this intelligent and cynical man. He was the son of the German
Emperor, Henry VI, and grandson of Frederick Barbarossa, and his mother was the
daughter of Roger I, the Norman King of Sicily. He inherited this kingdom in
1198, when he was four years old; his mother was his guardian for six months,
and when she died, Pope Innocent 111 (1198 to 1216) became regent and guardian.
He seems to have had an exceptionally good and remarkably mixed education, and
his accomplishments earned him the flattering title of *Stupor mundi*, the
amazement of the world. The result of getting an Arabic -view of Christianity,
and a Christian view of Islam, was to make him believe that all religions were
impostures, a view held perhaps by many a stifled observer in the Age of Faith.
But he talked about his views; his blasphemies and heresies are on record.
Growing up under the arrogant rule of Innocent III, who never seems to have
realized that his ward had come of age, he developed a slightly humorous
evasiveness. It was the papal policy to prevent any fresh coalescence of the
power of Germany and Italy, and it was equally Frederick's determination to get
whatever he could. When presently opportunity offered him the imperial crown of
Germany, he secured the Pope's support by agreeing, if he were elected, to
relinquish his possessions in Sicily and South Italy, and to put down heresy in
Germany. For Innocent III was one of the great persecuting Popes, an able,
grasping, and aggressive man. (For a Pope, he was exceptionally young. He became
Pope at thirty-seven.) It was Innocent who had preached a cruel crusade against
the heretics in the south of France, a crusade that presently became a looting
expedition beyond his control. So soon as Frederick was elected emperor (1211)
\ [#fn16]_ , 18 Innocent pressed for the, performance of the vows and promises he had
wrung from his dutiful ward. The clergy were to be free from lay jurisdiction
and from taxation, and exemplary cruelties were to be practised upon the
heretics. None of which things Frederick did. As we have already told, he would
not even relinquish Sicily. He liked Sicily as a place of residence better than
be liked Germany.

Innocent III died baffled in 1216, and his successor, Honorius III, effected
nothing. Honorius was succeeded by Gregory IX (1227), who evidently came to the
papal throne with a nervous resolution to master this perplexing young man. He
excommunicated him at once for failing to start upon his crusade, which was now
twelve years overdue; and he denounced his vices, heresies, and general offences
in a public letter (1227).

To this Frederick replied in a far abler document addressed to all the
princes of Europe, a document of extreme importance in history, because it is
the first clear statement of the issue between the pretensions of the Pope to be
absolute ruler of all Christendom, and the claims of the secular rulers.\ [#fn17]_ 
This, conflict had always been smouldering; it had broken out here in one form,
and there in another; but now Frederick put it in clear general terms upon which
men could combine together.

Having delivered this blow, be departed upon the pacific crusade of which we
have already told. In 1239, Gregory IX was excommunicating him for a second
time, and renewing that warfare of public abuse in which the papacy had already
suffered severely. The controversy was revived after Gregory IX was dead, when
Innocent IV was Pope; and again a devastating letter, which men were bound to
remember, was written by Frederick against the church. He denounced the pride
and irreligion of the clergy, and ascribed all the corruptions of the time to
their pride and wealth. He proposed to his fellow princes a general confiscation
of church property-for the good of the church. It was a suggestion that never
afterwards left the imagination of the European princes.

We will not go on to tell of his last years or of the disaster at Parma, due
to his carelessness, which cast a shadow of failure over his end. The particular
events of his life are far less significant than its general atmosphere. It is
possible to piece together something of his court, life in Sicily. He is
described towards the end of his life as «red, bald, and short-sighted»; but his
features were good and pleasing. He was luxurious in his way of living, and fond
of beautiful thing. He is described as licentious. But it is clear that his mind
was not satisfied by religious scepticism, and that he was a man of very
effectual curiosity and inquiry. He gathered Jewish and Moslem as well as
Christian philosophers at his court, and he did much to irrigate the Italian
mind with Saracenic influences. Through him Arabic numerals and algebra were
introduced to. Christian students, and among other philosophers at his court was
Michael Scott, who translated portions of Aristotle and the commentaries thereon
of the great Arab philosopher Averroes (of Cordoba).

In 1224 Frederick founded the University of Naples, and he enlarged and
enriched the great medical school at Salerno University, the most ancient of
universities. He also founded a zoological garden. He left a book on hawking,
which shows him to have been an acute observer of the habits of birds, and he
was one of the first Italians to write Italian verse. Italian poetry was indeed
born at his court. He has been called by an able writer, «the first of the
moderns», and the phrase expresses aptly the unprejudiced detachment of his
intellectual side. His was an all-round originality. During a gold shortage he
introduced and made a success of a coinage of stamped leather, bearing his,
promise to pay in gold, a sort of leather bank-note issue.\ [#fn18]_ 

In spite of the torrent of abuse and calumny in which Frederick was drenched,
he left a profound impression upon the popular imagination. He is still
remembered in South Italy almost as vividly as is Napoleon I by the peasants of
France; he is the «Gran Federigo». And German scholars declare that, in spite of
Frederick's manifest dislike for Germany, it is he, and not Frederick I,
Frederick Barbarossa, to whom that German legend originally attached-that legend
which represents a great monarch slumbering in a deep cavern, his beard grown
round a stone table, against a day of awakening when the world will be restored
by him from an extremity of disorder to peace. Afterwards, it seems, the story
was transferred to the Crusader Barbarossa, the grandfather of Frederick II.

A difficult child was Frederick II for Mother Church, and he was only the
precursor of many such difficult children. The princes and educated gentlemen
throughout Europe read his letters and discussed them. The more enterprising
university students found, marked, and digested the Arabic Aristotle he had made
accessible to them in Latin. Salerno cast a baleful light upon Rome. All sorts
of men must have been impressed by the futility of the excommunications and
interdicts that were levelled at Frederick.

.. [#fn16] He was crowned emperor in 1220 by Honorius III, the successor of Innocent.
.. [#fn17] Some authorities deny this authorship of this letter.
.. [#fn18] Perhaps parchment rather than leather. Such promises on parchment were also used by the Carthaginians. Was Frederick’s money an Inheritance from an old tradition living on in Sicily since Carthaginian times? —E. B.

