
32.13 Defects and Limitations of the Papacy
========================================================================
We have said that Innocent III never seemed to realize that his ward,
Frederick II, was growing up. It is equally true that the papacy never seemed to
realize that Europe was growing up. It is impossible for an intelligent modern
student of history not to sympathize with the underlying idea of the papal
court, with the idea of one universal rule of righteousness keeping the peace of
the earth, and not to recognize the many elements of nobility that entered into
the Lateran policy. Sooner or later mankind must come to one universal peace,
unless our race is to be destroyed by the increasing power of its own
destructive inventions; and that universal peace must needs take the form of a
government, that is to say a law-sustaining organization, in the best sense of
the word religious; a government ruling men through the educated coordination of
their minds in a common conception of human history and human destiny.

The papacy we must now recognize as the first clearly conscious attempt to
provide such a government in the world. We cannot too earnestly examine its
deficiencies and inadequacies, for every lesson we can draw from them is
necessarily of the greatest value to us in forming our ideas of our own
international relationships. We have tried to suggest the main factors in the
breakdown of the Roman Republic, and it now behoves us to attempt a diagnosis of
the failure of the Roman Church to secure and organize the good will of
mankind.

The first thing that will strike the student is the intermittence of the
efforts of the church to establish the world City of God. The policy of the
church was not whole-heartedly and continuously set upon that end. It was only
now and then that some fine personality or some group of fine personalities
dominated it in that direction. The kingdom of God that Jesus of Nazareth had
preached was overlaid, as we have explained, almost from the beginning by the
doctrines and ceremonial traditions of an earlier age, and of an intellectually
inferior type. Christianity almost from its commencement ceased to be purely
prophetic and creative. It entangled itself with archaic traditions of human
sacrifice, with Mithraic blood-cleansing, with priestcraft as ancient as human
society, and with elaborate doctrines about the structure of the divinity. The
gory forefinger of the Etruscan pontifex maximus emphasized the teachings of
Jesus of Nazareth; the mental complexity of the Alexandrian Greek entangled
them. In the inevitable jangle of these incompatibles the church had become
dogmatic. In despair of other solutions to its intellectual discords, it had
resorted to arbitrary authority. Its priests and bishops were more and more men
moulded to creeds and dogmas and set procedures; by the time they became
cardinals or popes they were usually oldish men, habituated to a politic
struggle for immediate ends and no longer capable of world-wide views. They no
longer wanted to see the Kingdom of God established in the hearts of men-they
had forgotten about that; they wanted to see the power of the church, which was
their own power, dominating men. They were prepared to bargain even with the
hates and fears and lusts in men's hearts to ensure that power. And it was just
because many of them probably doubted secretly of the entire soundness of their
vast and elaborate doctrinal fabric, that they would brook no discussion of it.
They were intolerant of questions or dissent, not because they were sure of
their faith, but because they were not. They wanted conformity for reasons of
policy. By the thirteenth century the church was evidently already morbidly
anxious about the gnawing doubts that might presently lay the whole structure of
its pretensions in ruins. It had no serenity of soul. It was hunting everywhere
for heretics as timid old ladies are said to look under beds and in cupboards
for burglars before retiring for the night.

We have already mentioned the Persian Mani, who was crucified and flayed in
the year 277. His way of representing the struggle between good and evil was as
a struggle between a power of light which was, as it were, in rebellion against
a power of darkness inherent in the universe. All these, profound mysteries are
necessarily represented by symbols and poetic expressions, and the ideas of Mani
still find a response in many intellectual temperaments to-day. One may bear
Manichaean doctrines from many Christian pulpits. But the orthodox Catholic
symbol was a different one. These Manichaean ideas had spread very widely in
Europe, and particularly in Bulgaria and the south of France. In the south of
France the people who held them were called the Cathars or Albigenses. Their
ideas jarred so little with the essentials of Christianity, that they believed
themselves to be devout Christians. As a body they lived lives of conspicuous
virtue and purity in a violent, undisciplined, and vicious age. But they
questioned the doctrinal soundness of Rome and the orthodox interpretation of
the Bible. They thought Jesus was a rebel against the cruelty of the God of the
Old Testament, and not his harmonious son. Closely associated with the
Albigenses were the Waldenses, the followers of a man called Waldo, who seems to
have been quite soundly Catholic in his theology, but equally offensive to the
church because he denounced the riches and luxury of the clergy. This was enough
for the Lateran, and so we have the spectacle of Innocent III preaching a
crusade against these unfortunate sectaries, and permitting the enlistment of
every wandering scoundrel at loose ends to carry fire and sword and rape and
every conceivable outrage among the most peaceful subjects of the King of
France. The accounts of the cruelties and abominations of this crusade are far
more terrible to read than any account of Christian martyrdoms by the pagans,
and. they have the added horror of being indisputably true.

This black and pitiless intolerance was an evil spirit to be mixed into the
project of a rule of God on earth. This was a spirit entirely counter to that of
Jesus of Nazareth. We do not hear of his smacking the faces or wringing the
wrists of recalcitrant or unresponsive disciples. But the Popes during their
centuries of power were always raging against the slightest reflection upon the
intellectual sufficiency of the church.

And the intolerance of the church was not confined to religious matters. The
shrewd, pompous, irascible, and rather malignant old men who manifestly
constituted a dominant majority in the councils of the church resented any
knowledge but their own knowledge, and distrusted any thought at all that they
did not correct and control. They set themselves to restrain science, of which
they were evidently Jealous. Any mental activity but their own struck them as
being insolent. Later on they were to have a great struggle upon the question of
the earth's position in space, and whether it moved round the sun or not. This
was really not the business of the church at all. She might very well have left,
to reason the things that are reason's, but she seems to have been impelled by
an inner necessity to estrange the intellectual conscience in men.

Had this intolerance sprung from a real intensity of conviction it would have
been bad enough, but it was accompanied by a scarcely disguised contempt for the
intelligence and mental dignity of the common man that makes it far less
acceptable to our modern judgments, and which no doubt, made it far less
acceptable to the free spirits of the time. We have told quite dispassionately
the policy of the Roman church towards her troubled sister in the East. Many of
the tools and expedients she used were abominable. In her treatment of her own
people a streak of real cynicism is visible. She destroyed her prestige by
disregarding her own teaching of righteousness. Of dispensations we have already
spoken (sec 11). Her crowning folly in the sixteenth century was the sale of
*indulgences,* whereby the sufferings of the soul in purgatory could be
commuted for a money payment. But the spirit that led at last to this shameless
and, as it proved, disastrous proceeding, was already very evident in the
twelfth and thirteenth centuries.

Long before the seed of criticism that Frederick II had sown had germinated
in men's minds and produced its inevitable crop of rebellion, there was apparent
a strong feeling in Christendom that all was not well with the spiritual
atmosphere. There began movements, movements that nowadays we should call
«revivalist», within the church, that implied rather than uttered a criticism of
the sufficiency of her existing methods and organization. Men sought fresh forms
of righteous living outside the monasteries and priesthood. One notable figure
is that of St. Francis of Assisi (1181-1226). We cannot tell here in any detail
of how this pleasant young gentleman gave up all the amenities and ease of his
life and went forth to seek God; the opening of the story is not unlike the
early experiences of Gautama Buddha. He had a sudden conversion in the midst of
a life of pleasure, and, taking a vow of extreme poverty, he gave himself up to
an imitation of the life of Christ, and to the service of the sick and wretched,
and more particularly to the service of the lepers, who then abounded in Italy.
He was joined by great multitudes of disciples, and so the first Friars of the
Franciscan Order came into existence. An order of women devotees was set up
beside the original confraternity, and in addition great numbers of men and
women were brought into less formal association. He preached, unmolested by the
Moslems, be it noted, in Egypt and Palestine, though the Fifth Crusade was then
in progress. His relations with the church are still a matter for discussion.
His work had been sanctioned by Pope Innocent III, but while he was in the East
there was a reconstitution of his order, intensifying its discipline and
substituting authority for responsive impulse, and as a consequence of these
changes he resigned its headship. To the end he clung passionately to the ideal
of poverty, but he was hardly dead before the order was holding property through
trustees and building a great church and monastery to his memory at Assisi. The
disciplines of the order that were applied after his death to his immediate
associates are scarcely to be distinguished from a persecution; several of the
more conspicuous zealots for simplicity were scourged, others were imprisoned,
one was killed while attempting to escape, and Brother Bernard, the «first
disciple», passed a year in the woods and hills, hunted like a wild beast.

This struggle within the Franciscan Order is a very interesting one, because
it foreshadows the great troubles that were coming to Christendom. All through
the thirteenth century a section of the Franciscans were straining at the rule
of the church, and in 1318 four of them were burnt alive at Marseilles as
incorrigible heretics. There seems to have been little difference between the
teaching and spirit of St. Francis and that of Waldo in the twelfth century, the
founder of the murdered sect of Waldenses. Both were passionately enthusiastic
for the spirit of Jesus of Nazareth. But while Waldo rebelled against the
church, St. Francis did his best to be a good child of the church, and his
comment on the spirit of official Christianity was only implicit. But both were
instances of an outbreak of conscience against authority and the ordinary
procedure of the church. And it is plain that in the second instance, as in the
first, the church scented rebellion.

A very different character to St. Francis was the Spaniard St. Dominic
(1170-1221), who was, of all things, orthodox. He had a passion for the
argumentative conversion of heretics, and he was commissioned by Pope Innocent
III to go and preach to the Albigenses. His work went on side by side with the
fighting and massacres of the crusade; whom Dominic could not convert,
Innocent's crusaders slew; yet his very activities and the recognition and
encouragement of his order by the Pope witness to the rising tide of discussion,
and to the persuasion even of the papacy that force was no remedy. In several
respects the development of the Black Friars or Dominicans—the Franciscans were
the Grey Friars-shows the Roman church at the parting of the ways, committing
itself more and more deeply to organized dogma, and so to a hopeless conflict
with the quickening intelligence and courage of mankind. She whose one duty was
to lead, chose to compel. The last discourse of St. Dominic to the heretics he
had sought to convert is preserved to us. It is a signpost in history. It
betrays the fatal exasperation of a man who has lost his faith in the power of
truth because his truth has not, prevailed. «For many years», he said, «I have
exhorted you in vain, with gentleness, preaching, praying, and weeping. But
according to the proverb of my country, where blessing can accomplish nothing,
blows shall may avail. We shall rouse against you princess and prelates, who,
alas! will arm nations and kingdoms against this land . . . and thus blows will
avail where blessings and gentleness have been powerless».\ [#fn19]_ 

The thirteenth century saw the development of a now institution in the
church, the papal Inquisition. Before this time it had been customary for the
Pope to make, occasional inquests or inquiries into heresy in this region or
that, but now Innocent III saw in the new order of the Dominicans a powerful
instrument of suppression. The Inquisition was organized as a standing inquiry
under their direction, and with fire and torment the church set itself, through
this instrument, to assail and weaken the human conscience in which its sole
hope of world dominion resided. Before the thirteenth century the penalty of
death had been inflicted but rarely upon heretics and unbelievers. Now in a
hundred market-places in Europe the dignitaries of the church watched the
blackened bodies of its antagonists, for the most part poor and insignificant
people, burn and sink pitifully and their own great mission to mankind burn and
sink with them into dust and ashes.

The beginnings of the Franciscans and the Dominicans were but two among many
of the new forces that were arising in Christendom, either to help or shatter
the church, as its own wisdom might decide. Those two orders the church did
assimilate and use, though with a little violence in the case of the former. But
other forces were more frankly disobedient and critical. A century and a half
later came Wycliffe (1320- 1384). He was a learned doctor at Oxford; for a time
he was Master of Balliol; and he held various livings in the church.

Quite late in his life he began a series of outspoken criticisms of the
corruption of the clergy and the unwisdom of the church. He organized a number
of poor priests, the Wycliffites, to spread his ideas throughout England; and in
order that people should judge between the church and himself, he translated the
Bible into English. He was a more learned and far abler man than either St.
Francis of St. Dominic. He had supporters in high places and a great following
among the people; and though Rome raged against him, and ordered his
imprisonment, he died a free man, still administering the Sacraments as parish
priest of Lutterworth. But the black and ancient spirit that was leading the
Catholic church to its destruction would not let his bones rest in his grave. By
a decree of the Council of Constance in 1415, his remains were ordered to be dug
up and burnt, an order which was carried out at the command of Pope Martin V by
Bishop Fleming in 1428. This desecration was not the act of some isolated
fanatic; it was the official act of the church.

.. [#fn19] Encyclopaedia Britannica, art, "Dominic."
