
32.14 A List of Leading Popes
========================================================================
The history of the papacy is confusing to the general reader because of the
multitude and abundance of the Popes. They mostly began to reign as old men, and
their reigns were short, averaging less than two years each. But certain of the
Popes stand out and supply convenient handles for the student to grasp. Such
were Gregory I (590-604) the Great, the first monkish Pope, the friend of
Benedict, the sender of the English mission. Other noteworthy Popes, are Leo III
(795-816), who crowned Charlemagne, the scandalous Popes John XI (931-936) and
John XII (955-963), which latter was deposed by the Emperor Otto I, and the
great Hildebrand, who ended his days as Pope Gregory VII (1073-1085), and who
did so much by establishing the celibacy of the clergy, and insisting upon the
supremacy of the church over kings and princes, to centralize the power of the
church in Rome. There was a great struggle between Hildebrand and the Emperor
elect Henry IV upon the question of investitures. The emperor attempted to
depose the pope; the pope excommunicated the emperor and released his subjects
from their allegiance. The emperor was obliged to go in penitence to the pope at
Canossa and to await forgiveness for three days and nights in the courtyard of
the castle, clad in sackcloth and barefooted to the snow. The next Pope but one
after Gregory VII was Urban II (1087-1099), the Pope of the First Crusade. The
period from the time of Gregory VII onward for a century and a half, was the
great period of ambition and effort for the church. There was a real sustained
attempt to unite all Christendom under a purified and reorganized church.

The setting up of Latin kingdoms in Syria and the Holy Land, in religious
communion with Rome, after the First Crusade, marked the opening stage of a
conquest of Eastern Christianity by Rome that reached its climax during the
Latin rule in Constantinople (1204-1261).

In 1176, at Venice, the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa (Frederick I) knelt to
the Pope Alexander III, recognized his spiritual supremacy, and swore fealty to
him. But after the death of Alexander III, in 1181, the peculiar weakness of the
papacy, its liability to fall to old and enfeebled men, became manifest. Five
Popes tottered to the Lateran to die within the space of ten years. Only with
Innocent III (1198-1216) did another vigorous Pope take up the great policy of
the City of God.

Under Innocent III, the guardian of that Emperor Frederick II, whose career
we have already studied in sec10 and sec12, and the five Popes who followed him,
the Pope of Rome came nearer to being the monarch of a united Christendom than
he had ever been before, and was ever to be again. The empire was weakened by
internal dissensions, Constantinople was in Latin hands, from Bulgaria to
Ireland and from Norway to Sicily and Jerusalem the Pope was supreme. Yet this
supremacy was more apparent than real. For, as we have seen, while in the time
of Urban the power of faith was strong in all Christian Europe, in the time of
Innocent III the papacy had lost its hold upon the hearts of princes, and the
faith and conscience of the common people was turning against a merely political
and aggressive church.

The church in the thirteenth century was extending its legal power in the
world, and losing its grip upon men's consciences. It was becoming less
persuasive and more violent. No intelligent man can tell of this process, or
read of this process of failure without very mingled feelings. The church had
sheltered and formed a new Europe throughout the long ages of European darkness
and chaos; it had been the matrix in which the new civilization had been cast.
But this new-formed civilization was impelled to grow by its own inherent
vitality, and the church lacked sufficient power of growth and accommodation.
The time was fast approaching when this matrix was to be broken.

The first striking intimation of the decay of the living and sustaining
forces of the papacy appeared when presently the Popes came into conflict with
the growing power of the French king. During the lifetime of the Emperor
Frederick II, Germany fell into disunion, and the French king began to play the
rôle of guard, supporter, and rival to the Pope that had hitherto fallen to the
Hohenstaufen emperors. A series of Popes pursued the policy of supporting the
French monarchs. French princes were established in the kingdom of Sicily and
Naples, with the support and approval of Rome, and the French kings saw before
them the possibility of restoring and ruling the Empire of Charlemagne. When,
however, the German interregnum after the death of Frederick II, the last of the
Hohenstaufens, came to an end and Rudolf of Habsburg was elected first Habsburg
Emperor (1273), the policy of the Lateran began to fluctuate between France and
Germany, veering about with the sympathies of each successive Pope. In the East
in 1261 the Greeks recaptured Constantinople from the Latin emperors, and the
founder of the new Greek dynasty, Michael Palaeologus, Michael VIII, after some
unreal tentatives of reconciliation with the Pope, broke away from the Roman
communion altogether, and with that, and the fall of the Latin kingdoms in Asia,
the eastward ascendancy of the Popes came to an end.

In 1294 Boniface VIII became Pope. He was an Italian, hostile to the French,
and full of a sense of the great traditions and mission of Rome. For a time he
carried things with a high hand. In 1300 be held a jubilee, and a vast multitude
of pilgrims assembled in Rome. «So, great was the influx of money into the papal
treasury, that two assistants were kept busy with rakes collecting the offerings
that were deposited at the tomb of St. Peter».\ [#fn20]_  But this festival was a
delusive triumph.

It is easier to raise a host of excursionists than a band of crusaders.
Boniface came into conflict with the French king in 1302, and in 1303, as he was
about to pronounce sentence of excommunication against that monarch, he was
surprised and arrested in his own ancestral palace, at Anagni, by Guillaume de
Nogaret. This agent from the French king forced an entrance into the palace,
made his way into the bedroom of the frightened Pope-he was lying in bed with a
cross in his hands and heaped threats and insults upon him. The Pope was
liberated a day or so later by the townspeople, and returned to Rome; but there
he was seized upon and again made prisoner by the Orsini family, and in a few
weeks' time the shocked and disillusioned old man died a prisoner in their
hands.

The people of Anagni did resent the first outrage, and rose against Nogaret
to liberate Boniface, but then Anagni was the Pope's native town. The important
point to note is that the French king, in this rough treatment of the head of
Christendom, was acting with the full approval of his people; he had summoned a
council of the Three Estates of France (lords, church, and commons) and gained
their consent before proceeding to extremities. Neither in Italy, Germany, nor
England was there the slightest general manifestation of disapproval at this
free handling of the sovereign pontiff. The idea of Christendom had decayed
until its power over the minds of men had gone.

Throughout the fourteenth century the papacy did nothing to recover its moral
sway. The next Pope elected, Clement V, was a Frenchman, the choice of King
Philip of France. He never came to Rome. He set up his court in the town of
Avignon, which then belonged not to, France, but to the Papal See, though
embedded in French territory, and there his successors remained until 1377, when
Pope Gregory XI returned to the Vatican palace in Rome. But Gregory XI did not
take the sympathies of the whole church with him. Many of the cardinals were of
French origin, and their habits and associations were rooted deep at Avignon.
When in 1378 Gregory XI died, and an Italian, Urban VI, was elected, these
dissentient cardinals declared the election invalid, and elected another Pope,
the anti-Pope, Clement VII. This split is called the Great Schism. The Popes
remained in Rome, and all the anti-French powers, the Emperor, the King of
England, Hungary,

Poland, and the North of Europe were loyal to them. The anti-Popes, on the
other hand, continued in Avignon, and were supported by the King of France, his
ally the King of Scotland, Spain, Portugal, and various German princes. Each
Pope excommunicated and cursed the adherents of his rival, so that by one
standard or another all Christendom was damned during this time (1378-1417). The
lamentable effect of this split upon the solidarity of Christendom it is
impossible to exaggerate. Is it any marvel that such men as Wycliffe began to
teach men to think on their own account when the fountain of truth thus squirted
against itself? In 1417 the Great Schism was healed at the Council of Constance,
the same council that dug up and burnt Wycliffe's bones, and which, as we shall
tell later, caused the burning of John Huss; at this council, Pope and anti-Pope
resigned or were swept aside, and Martin V became the sole Pope of a formally
reunited but spiritually very badly strained Christendom.

How later on the Council of Basle (1437) led to a fresh schism, and to
further anti-Popes, we cannot relate here. Such briefly, is the story, of the
great centuries of papal ascendancy and papal decline. It is the story of the
failure to achieve the very noble and splendid idea of a unified and religious
world. We have pointed out in the previous section how greatly the inheritance
of a complex dogmatic theology encumbered the church in this its ambitious
adventure. It had too much theology, and not enough religion. But it may not be
idle to point out here how much the individual insufficiency of the Popes also
contributed to the collapse of its scheme and dignity. There was no such level
of education in the world as to provide a succession of cardinals and popes with
the breadth of knowledge and outlook needed for the task they had undertaken;
they were not sufficiently educated for their task, and only a few by sheer
force of transcended that defeat. And, as we have already pointed out, they
were, when at last they got to power, too old to use it. Before they could grasp
the situation they had to control, most of them were dead. It would be
interesting to speculate how far it would have tilted the balance in favour of
the church if the cardinals had retired at fifty, and if no one could have been
elected Pope after fifty-five, This would have lengthened the average reign of
each Pope, and enormously increased the continuity of the policy of the
church.

And it is perhaps possible that a more perfect system of selecting the
cardinals, who were the electors and counsellors of the Pope, might have been
devised. The rules and ways by which men reach power are of very great
importance in human affairs. The psychology of the ruler is a science that has
still to be properly studied. We have seen the Roman Republic wrecked, and here
we see the church failing in its world mission very largely through ineffective
electoral methods.

.. [#fn20] J. H. Robinson.
