
32.2 The Feudal System
========================================================================
.. _Figure 609:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0609.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0609.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 609

    Figure 609: Map of Europe about 500 A.D.

It is necessary that the reader should have a definite idea of the social
condition of western Europe in the eighth century. It was not a barbarism.
Eastern Europe was still barbaric and savage; things had progressed but little
beyond the state of affairs described by Gibbon in his account of the mission of
Priscus to Attila (see p. 485). But western Europe was a shattered civilization,
without law, without administration, with roads destroyed and education
disorganized, but still with great numbers of people with civilized ideas and
habits and traditions. It was a time of confusion, of brigandage, of crimes
unpunished and universal insecurity. It is very interesting to trace how, out of
the universal mêlée the beginnings of a new order appeared. In a modern
breakdown there would probably be the formation of local vigilance societies,
which would combine and restore a police administration and a roughly democratic
rule. But in the broken-down western empire of the sixth, seventh, and eighth
centuries, men's ideas turned rather to leaders than to committees, and the
centres about which affairs crystallized were here barbaric chiefs, here a
vigorous bishop or some surviving claimant to a Roman official position, here a
long-recognized landowner or man of ancient family, and here again some vigorous
usurper of power. No solitary man was safe. So men were forced to link
themselves with others, preferably people stronger than themselves. The lonely
man chose the most powerful and active person in his district and became his
man. The freeman or the weak lordling of a petty territory linked himself to
some more powerful lord. The protection of that lord (or the danger of his
hostility) became more considerable with every such accession. So very rapidly
there went on a process of political crystallization in the confused and lawless
sea into which the Western Empire had liquefied. These natural associations and
alliances of protector and subordinates grew very rapidly into a system, *the
feudal system,* traces of which are still to be found in the social structure
of every European community west of Russia.

This process speedily took on technical forms and laws of its own. In such a
country as Gaul it was already well in progress in the days of insecurity
*before* the barbarian tribes broke into the empire as conquerors. The
Franks when they came into Gaul brought with them an institution, which we have
already noted in the case of the Macedonians, and which was probably of very
wide distribution among the Nordic people, the gathering about the chief or war
king of a body of young men of good family, the companions or comitatus, his
counts or captains. It was natural in the case of invading peoples that the
relations of a weak lord to a strong lord should take on the relations of a
count to his king, and that a conquering chief should divide seized and
confiscated estates among his companions. From the side of the decaying empire
there came to feudalism the idea of the grouping for mutual protection of men
and estates; from the Teutonic side came the notions of knightly association,
devotion, and personal service. The former was the economic side of the
institution, the latter the chivalrous.

The analogy of the aggregation of feudal groupings with crystallization is a
very close one. As the historian watches the whirling and eddying confusion of
the fourth and fifth centuries in Western Europe, he begins to perceive the
appearance of these pyramidal growths of heads and subordinates and
sub-subordinates, which jostle against one another, branch, dissolve again, or
coalesce. «We use the term 'feudal system' for convenience sake, but with a
degree of impropriety if it conveys the meaning 'systematic.' Feudalism in its
most flourishing age was anything but systematic. It was confusion roughly
organized. Great diversity prevailed everywhere, and we should not be surprised
to find some different fact or custom in every lordship. Anglo-Norman feudalism
attained in the eleventh and twelfth centuries a logical completeness and a
uniformity of practice which, in the feudal age proper, can hardly be found
elsewhere through so large a territory. . . .

«The foundation of the feudal relationship proper was the *fief,* which
was usually land, but might be any desirable thing, as an office, a revenue in
money or kind, the right to collect a toll, or operate a mill. In return for the
fief, the man became the vassal of his lord; he knelt before him, and, with his
hands between his lord's hands, promised him fealty and service. . . . The
faithful performance of all the duties he had assumed in homage constituted the
vassal's right and title to his fief. So long as they were fulfilled, he, and
his heir after him, held the fief as his property, practically and in relation
to all undertenants as if he were the owner. In the ceremony of homage and
investiture, which is the creative contract of feudalism, the obligations
assumed by the two parties were, as a rule, not specified in exact terms.
They were determined by local custom. . . . In many points of detail the
vassal's services differed widely in different parts of the feudal world. We may
say, however, that they fall into two classes, general and specific. The general
included all that might come under the idea of loyalty, seeking the lord's
interests, keeping his secrets, betraying the plans of his enemies, protecting
his family, etc. The specific services are capable of more definite statement,
and they usually received exact definition in custom and sometimes in written
documents. The most characteristic of these was the military service, which
included appearance, in the field on summons with a certain force, often armed
in a specified way, and remaining a specified length of time. It often included
also the duty of guarding the lord's castle, and of holding one's own castle
subject to the plans of the lord for the defence of his fief. . . .

«Theoretically regarded, feudalism covered Europe with a network of these
fiefs, rising in graded ranks one above the other from the smallest, the
knight's fee, at the bottom, to the king at the top, who was the supreme
landowner, or who held the kingdom from God. . . .»\ [#fn1]_ 

But this was the theory that was superimposed upon the established facts. The
reality of feudalism was its voluntary co-operation.

«The feudal state was one in which, it has been said, private law had usurped
the place of public law». But rather is it truer that public law had failed and
vanished and private law had come in to fill the vacuum. Public duty had become
private obligation.

.. [#fn1] Encyclopaedia Britannica, article "Feudalism," by Professor G. B. Adams.

