
32.3 The Frankish Kingdom of the Merovingians
========================================================================

.. _Figure 611:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0611.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0611.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 611

    Figure 611: Frankish Dominion in the time of Charles Martel

We have already mentioned various kingdoms of the barbarian tribes who set up
a more or less flimsy dominion over this or that area amidst the debris of the
empire, the kingdoms of the Suevi and West Goths in Spain, the East-Gothic
kingdom in Italy, and the Italian Lombard kingdom which succeeded the Goths
after Justinian had expelled the latter and after the great pestilence had
devastated Italy. The Frankish kingdom was another such barbarian power which
arose first in what is now Belgium, and which spread southward to the Loire, but
it developed far more strength and solidarity than any of the others. It was the
first real state to emerge from the universal wreckage. It became at last a wide
and vigorous political reality, and from it are derived two great powers of
moderm Europe, France and the German Empire. Its founder was Clovis (481-511)
who began as a small king in Belgium and ended with his southern frontiers
nearly at the Pyrenees He divided his kingdom among his four sons, but the
Franks retained a tradition of unity in spite of this division, and for a time
fraternal wars for a single control united rather than divided them. A more
serious split arose, however, through the Latinization of the Western Franks,
who occupied Romanized Gaul and who learnt to speak the corrupt Latin of the
subject population, while the Franks of the Rhineland retained their Low German
speech. At a low level of civilization, differences in language cause very
powerful political strains. For a hundred and fifty years the Frankish world was
split in two, Neustria, the nucleus of France, speaking a Latinish speech, which
became at last the French language we know, and Austrasia, the Rhineland, which
remained German.\ [#fn2]_ 

We will not tell here of the decay of the dynasty, the Merovingian dynasty,
founded by Clovis; nor how in Austrasia a certain court official, the Mayor of
the Palace, gradually became the king *de facto* and used the real king as
a puppet. The position of Mayor of the Palace also became hereditary in the
seventh century, and in 687 a certain Pepin of Heristhal, the Austrasian Mayor
of the Palace, had conquered Neustria and reunited all the Franks. He was
followed in 114 by his son, Charles Martel, who also bore no higher title than
Mayor of the Palace. (His poor little Merovingian kings do not matter in the
slightest degree to us here.) It was this Charles Martel who stopped the
Moslems. They had pushed as far as Tours when he met them, and in a great battle
between that place and Poitiers (732) utterly defeated them and. broke their
spirit. Thereafter the Pyrenees remained their utmost boundary; they came no
further into Western Europe.

Charles Martel divided his power between two sons, but one resigned and went
into a monastery, leaving his brother Pepin sole ruler. This Pepin it was who
finally extinguished the descendants of Clovis. He sent to the Pope to ask who
was the true king of the Franks, the man who held the power or the man who wore
the crown; and the Pope, who was in need of a supporter, decided in favour of
the Mayor of the Palace. So Pepin was chosen king at a gathering of the Frankish
nobles in the Merovingian capital Soissons, and anointed and crowned. That was
in 751. The Franco-Germany he united was consolidated by his son Charlemagne. It
held together until the death of his grandson Louis (840), and then France and
Germany broke away again-to, the great injury of mankind. It was not a
difference of race or temperament, it was a difference of language and tradition
that split these Frankish peoples asunder.

That old separation of Neustria, and Austrasia still works out in bitter
consequences. In 1916 the ancient conflict of Neustria. and Austrasia had broken
out into war once more. In the August of that year the present writer visited
Soissons, and crossed the temporary wooden bridge that had been built by the
English after the Battle of the Aisne from the main part of the town to the
suburb of St. Médard.

Canvas screens protected passengers upon the bridge from the observation of
the German sharpshooters who were sniping from their trenches down the curve of
the river. He went with his guides across a field and along by the wall of an
orchard in which a German shell exploded as he passed. So he reached the
battered buildings that stand upon the site of the ancient abbey of St. Médard,
in which the last Merovingian was deposed and Pepin the Short was crowned in his
stead. Beneath these ancient buildings there were great crypts, very useful as
dug-outs-for the German advanced lines were not more than a couple of hundred
yards away. The sturdy French soldier lads were cooking and resting in these
shelters, and lying down to sleep among the stone coffins that had held the
bones of their Merovingian kings.

.. [#fn2] The Franks differed from the Swabians and South Germans, and came much nearer the Anglo-Saxons in that they spoke a "Low German" and not a "High German" dialect. Their language resembled plattdeutsch and Anglo-Saxon, and was the direct parent of Dutch and Flemish. In fact, the Franks where they were not Latinized became Flemings and "Dutchmen" of South Holland (North Holland is still Friesisch-i.e. Anglo-Saxon). The "French" which the Latinized Franks and Burgundians spoke in the seventh to the tenth centuries was remarkably like the Romansch language of Switzerland, judging from the vestiges that remain in old documents. —H. H. J.

