
32.4 The Christianization of the Western Barbarians
========================================================================
The populations over which Charles Martel and King Pepin ruled were at very
different levels of civilization in different districts. To the west and south
the bulk of the people consisted of Latinized and Christian Kelts; in the
central regions these rulers had to deal with such more or less Christianized
Germans as the Franks and Burgundians and Alemanni; to the north-east were still
pagan Frisians and Saxons; to the cast were the Bavarians, recently
Christianized through the activities of St. Boniface; and to the east of them
again pagan Slavs and Avars. The «Paganism» of the Germans and Slavs was very
similar to the primitive religion of the Greeks; it was a manly religion in
which temple, priest, and sacrifices played a small part, and its gods were like
men, a kind of «school prefects» of more powerful beings who interfered
impulsively and irregularly in human affairs. The Germans had a Jupiter in Odin,
a Mars in Thor, a, Venus in Freya, and so on. Throughout the seventh and eighth
centuries a steady process of conversion to Christianity went on amidst these
German and Slavonic tribes.

It will be interesting to English-speaking readers to note that the most
zealous and successful missionaries among the Saxons and Frisians came from
England. Christianity was twice planted in the British Isles. It was already
there while Britain was a part of the Roman Empire; a martyr, St. Alban, gave
his name to the town of St. Albans, and nearly every visitor to Canterbury has
also visited little old St. Martin's church, which was used during the Roman
times. From Britain, as we have already said, Christianity spread beyond the
imperial boundaries into Ireland-the chief missionary was St. Patrick and there
was a vigorous monastic movement with which are connected the names of St.
Columba and the religious settlements of Iona. Then in the fifth and sixth
centuries came the fierce and pagan English, and they cut off the early Church
of Ireland from the main body of Christianity. In the seventh century Christian
missionaries were converting the English, both in the north from Ireland and in
the south from Rome. The Rome mission was sent by Pope Gregory the Great just at
the close of the sixth century. The story goes that he saw English boys for sale
in the Roman slave market, though it is a little difficult to understand how
they got there. They were very fair and good-looking. In answer to his
inquiries, he was told that they were Angles. «Not Angles, but Angels», said be,
«had they but the gospel».

The mission worked through the seventh century. Before that century was over,
most of the English were Christians; though Mercia, the central English kingdom,
held out stoutly against the priests and for the ancient faith and ways. And
there was a swift progress in learning upon the part of these new converts. The
monasteries of the kingdom of Northumbria in the north of England became a
centre of light and learning. Theodore of Tarsus was one of the earliest
archbishops of Canterbury (669-690). «While Greek was utterly unknown in the
west of Europe, it was mastered by some of the pupils of Theodore. The
monasteries contained many monks who were excellent scholars. Most famous of all
was Bede, known as the Venerable Bede (673-735), a monk of Jarrow (on Tyne). He
had for his pupils the six hundred monks of that monastery, besides the many
strangers, who came to hear him. He gradually mastered all the learning of his
day, and left at his death forty-five volumes of his writings, the most
important of which are 'The Ecclesiastical History of the English' and his
translation of the Gospel of John into English. His writings were widely known
and used throughout Europe. He reckoned all dates from the birth of Christ, and
through his works the use of Christian chronology became common in Europe. Owing
to the large number of monasteries and monks in Northumbria, that part of
England was for a time far in advance of the south in civilization».\ [#fn3]_ 

.. _Figure 615:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0615.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0615.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 615

    Figure 615: Map — England, 640 A.D.

In the seventh and eighth centuries we find the English missionaries active
upon the eastern frontiers of the Frankish kingdom.

Chief among these was St. Boniface (680-755), who was born at Credit-on, in
Devonshire, who converted the Frisians, Thuringians, and Hessians, and who was
martyred in Holland.

Both in England and on the Continent the ascendant rulers seized upon
Christianity as a unifying force to cement their conquests. Christianity became
a banner for aggressive chiefs as it did in Uganda in Africa in the bloody days
before that country was annexed to the British Empire. After Pepin, who died in
768, came two sons, Charles and another, who divided his kingdom; but the
brother of Charles died in 771, and Charles then became sole king (771-814) of
the growing realm of the Franks. This Charles is known in history as Charles the
Great, or Charlemagne. As in the case of Alexander the Great and Julius Cæsar,
posterity has enormously exaggerated his memory. He made his wars of aggression
definitely religious wars. All the world of north-western Europe, which is now
Great Britain, France, Germany, Denmark, and Norway and Sweden, was in the ninth
century an arena of bitter conflict between the old faith and the new. Whole
nations were converted to Christianity by the sword just as Islam in Arabia,
Central Asia, and Africa had converted whole nations a century or so before.

With fire and sword Charlemagne preached the Gospel of the Cross to the
Saxons, Bohemians, and as far as the Danube into what is now Hungary; be carried
the same teaching down the Adriatic Coast through what is now Dalmatia, and
drove the Moslems back from the Pyrenees as far as Barcelona.

Moreover, he, it was who sheltered Egbert, an exile from Wessex, in England,
and assisted him presently to establish himself as King in Wessex (802). Egbert
subdued the Britons in Cornwall, as Charlemagne conquered the Britons of
Brittany, and by a series of wars, which he continued after the death of his
Frankish patron, made himself at last the first King of all England (828).

But the attacks of Charlemagne upon the last strongholds of paganism provoked
a vigorous reaction on the part of the unconverted. The Christianized English
had retained very little of the seamanship that had brought them from the
mainland, and the Franks had not yet become seamen. As the Christian propaganda
of Charlemagne swept towards the shores of the North and Baltic Seas, the pagans
were driven to the sea. They retaliated for the Christian persecutions with
plundering raids and expeditions against the northern coasts of France and
against Christian England.

These pagan Saxons and English of the mainland and their kindred from Denmark
and Norway are the Danes and Northmen of our national histories. They were also
called Vikings,\ [#fn4]_  which means «inlet-men», because they came from the deep
inlets of the Scandinavian coast.

.. _Figure 617:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0617.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0617.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 617

    Figure 617: Map — England at the Treaty of Wedmore, 878

They came in long black galleys, making little use of sails. Most of our
information about these wars and invasions of the Pagan Vikings is derived from
Christian sources, and so we have abundant information of the massacres and
atrocities of their raids and very little about the cruelties inflicted upon
their pagan brethren, the Saxons, at the hands of Charlemagne, Their animus
against the cross and against monks and nuns was extreme. They delighted in the
burning of monasteries and nunneries and the slaughter of their inmates.

Throughout the period between the fifth and the ninth centuries these Vikings
or Northmen were learning seamanship, becoming bolder, and ranging further. They
braved the northern seas until the icy shores of Greenland were a familiar
haunt, and by the ninth century they had settlements (of which Europe in general
knew nothing) in America. In the tenth and eleventh centuries many of their
sagas began to be written down in Iceland. They saw the world in terms of
valiant adventure. They assailed the walrus, the bear, and the whale. In their
imaginations, a great and rich city to the south, a sort of confusion of Rome
and Byzantium, loomed large. They called it «Miklagard» (Michael's court) or
Micklegarth. The magnetism of Micklegarth was to draw the descendants of these
Northmen down into the Mediterranean by two routes, by the west and also across
Russia from the Baltic, as we shall tell later. By the Russian route went also
the kindred Swedes.

So long as Charlemagne and Egbert lived, the Vikings were no more than
raiders; but as the ninth century wore on, these raids developed into organized
invasions. In several districts of England the bold of Christianity was by no
means firm as yet. In Mercia in particular the pagan Northmen found sympathy and
help. By 886 the Danes had conquered a fair part of England, and the English
king, Alfred the Great, had recognized their rule over their conquests, the
Dane-law, in the pact he made with Guthrum their leader. A little later, in 912,
another expedition under Rolf the Ganger established itself upon the coast of
France in the region that was known henceforth as Normandy (= Nortbman-dy). But
of how there was presently a fresh conquest of England by the Danes, and bow
finally the Duke of Normandy became King of England, we cannot tell at any
length. There were very small racial and social differences between Angle,
Saxon, Jute, Dane, or Norman; and though these changes loom large in the
imaginations of the English, they are seen to be very slight rufflings, indeed
of the stream of history when we measure them by the standards of a greater
world. The issue between Christianity and paganism vanished presently from the
struggle. By the Treaty of Wedmore the Danes agreed to be baptized if they were
assured of their conquests; and the descendants of Ralf in Normandy were not
merely Christianized, but they learnt to speak French from the more civilized
people about them, forgetting their own Norse tongue. Of much greater
significance in the history of mankind are the relations of Charlemagne with his
neigbours to the south and east and to the imperial tradition.

.. [#fn3] :t:`A General History of Europe`, Thatcher and Schwill.

.. [#fn4] N.B. — Vik-ings, not Vi-kings, Vik = a fiord or inlet.
