
32.6 The Personality of Charlemagne
========================================================================
In spite of the fact that we have a life of him written by his contemporary,
Eginhard,\ [#fn6]_  the character and personality of Charlemagne are difficult to
visualize. Eginhard lacks vividness; he tells many particulars, but not the
particulars that make a man live again in the record. Charlemagne, he says, was
a tall man, with a rather feeble voice; and he had bright eyes and a long nose.
«The top of his head was round», whatever that may mean, and his hair was
«white». He had a thick, rather short neck, and «his belly too prominent». He
wore a tunic with a silver border, and gartered hose. He had a blue cloak and
was always girt with his sword, hilt and belt being of gold and silver.

He was evidently a man of great activity, one imagines him moving quickly,
and his numerous love affairs, did not interfere at all with his incessant
military and political labours. He had numerous wives and mistresses. He took
much exercise, was fond of pomp and religious ceremonies, and gave generously.
He was a man of very miscellaneous activity and great intellectual enterprise,
and with a self-confidence that is rather suggestive of William II, the
ex-German Emperor, the last, perhaps for ever, of this series of imitation
Cæsars in Europe which Charlemagne began.

The mental life that Eginhard records of him is interesting, because it not
only gives glimpses of a curious character, but serves as a sample of the
intellectuality of the time. He could read probably; at meals he «listened to
music or reading», but we are told that he had not acquired the art of writing;
«he used to keep his writing-book and tablets under his pillow, that when be had
leisure he might practise his hand in forming letters, but he made little
progress in an art begun too late in life». He had, however, a real respect for
learning and a real desire for knowledge, and he did his utmost to attract men
of learning to his court. Among others who came was Alcuin, a learned
Englishman. All those learned men were, of course, clergymen, there being no
other learned men, and naturally they gave a strongly clerical tinge to the
information they imparted to their master. At his court, which was usually at
Aix-la-Chapelle or Mayence, be maintained in the winter months a curious
institution called his «school», in which he and his erudite associates affected
to lay aside all thoughts of worldly position, assumed names taken from the
classical writers or from Holy Writ, and discoursed - upon theology and
literature. Charlemagne himself was «David». He developed a considerable
knowledge of theology, and it is to him that we must ascribe the addition of the
word, *filioque* to the Nicene Creed, an addition that finally split the
Latin and Greek churches asunder. But it is more than doubtful if he had any
such separation in mind. He wanted to add a word or so to the creed, just as the
Emperor William II wanted to write operas and paint pictures,\ [#fn7]_  and he took up
what was originally a Spanish innovation.

Of his organization of his empire there is little to be said here. He was far
too restless and busy to consider the quality of his successor or the condition
of political stability, and the most noteworthy thing in this relationship is
that be particularly schooled his son and successor, Louis the Pious (814-840),
to take the crown from the altar and crown himself. But Louis the Pious was too
pious to adhere to those instructions when the Pope made an objection.

The legislation of Charlemagne was greatly coloured by Bible reading; he knew
his Bible well, as the times went; and it is characteristic of him that after he
had been crowned emperor be required every male subject above the age of twelve
to renew his oath of allegiance, and to undertake to be not, simply a good
subject, but a good Christian. To refuse baptism and to retract after baptism
were crimes punishable by death. He did much to encourage architecture, and
imported many Italian architects, chiefly from Ravenna, to whom we owe many of
the pleasant Byzantine buildings that still at Worms and Cologne and elsewhere
delight the tourist in the Rhineland. He founded a number of cathedrals and
monastic schools, did much to encourage the study of classical Latin, and was a
distinguished amateur of church music. The possibility of his talking Latin and
understanding Greek is open to discussion; probably he talked French-Latin.
Frankish, however, was his habitual tongue. He made a collection of old German
songs and tales, but these were destroyed by his successor Louis the Pious on
account of their paganism.

He corresponded with Haroun-al-Raschid, the Abbasid Caliph at Bagdad, who was
not perhaps the less friendly to him on account of his vigorous handling of the
Omayyad Arabs in Spain Gibbon supposes that this «public correspondence was
founded on vanity», and that «their remote situation left no room for a
competition of interest». But with the Byzantine Empire between them in the
East, and the independent caliphate of Spain in the West and a common danger in
the Turks of the great plains, they had three very excellent reasons for
cordiality. Haroun-al-Raschid, says Gibbon, sent Charlemagne by his ambassadors
a splendid tent, a water clock, an elephant, and the keys of the Holy Sepulchre.
The last item suggests that Charlemagne was to some extent regarded by the
Saracen monarch as the protector of the Christians and Christian properties in
his dominions. Some historians declare explicitly that there was a treaty to
that effect.

.. [#fn6] Eginhard’s :t:`Life of Karl the Great`. (Glaister.)

.. [#fn7] The addition was discreetly opposed by Leo III "In the correspondence between them the Pope assumes the liberality of a statesman and the prince descends to the prejudice and passions of a priest." —Gibbon, chap. ix.
