
32.8 The Normans, the Saracens, the Hungarians and the Seljuk Turks
========================================================================

.. _Figure 629:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0629.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0629.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 629

    Figure 629: France at the close of the 10th century

While the Holy Roman Empire and the kingdoms of France and England were thus
appearing amidst the extreme political fragmentation of the civilization of
Western Europe civilization and the Byzantine Empire were being subjected to a
threefold attack: from the Saracen powers, from the North-men, and more slowly
developed and most formidable of all, South Russia, and also by way of Armenia
and the Empire of Bagdad from Central Asia.

After the overthrow of the Omayyads by the Abbasid dynasty, the strength of
the Saracenic impulse against Europe diminished. Islam was no longer united.
Spain was under a separate Omayyad Caliph, North Africa, though nominally
subject to the Abbasids, was really independent, and presently (969) Egypt
became a separate power with a Shiite Caliph of its own, a pretender claiming
descent from Ali and Fatima (the Fatimite Caliphate). These Egyptian Fatimites,
the green flag Moslems, were fanatics in comparison with the Abbasids, and did
much to embitter the genial relations of Islam and Christianity. They took
Jerusalem, and interfered with the Christian access to the Holy Sepulchre. On
the other side of the shrunken Abbasid domain there was also a Shiite kingdom in
Persia. The chief Saracen conquest in the ninth century was Sicily; but this was
not overrun in the grand old style in a year or so, but subjugated tediously
through a long century, and with many set-backs. The Spanish Saracens disputed
in Sicily with the Saracens from Africa.. In Spain the Saracens were giving
ground before a renascent Christian effort. Nevertheless, the Byzantine Empire
and Western Christendom were still so weak upon the Mediterranean Sea that the
Saracen raiders and pirates from North Africa were able to raid almost
unchallenged in South Italy and the Greek Islands.

But now a new force was appearing in the Mediterranean. We have already
remarked that the Roman Empire never extended itself to the shores of the Baltic
Sea, nor had ever the vigour to push itself into Denmark. The Nordic Aryan
peoples of these neglected regions learnt much from the empire that was unable
to subdue them; as we have already rioted, they developed the art of
shipbuilding and became bold seamen, they spread across the North Sea to the
west, and across the Baltic and up the Russian rivers into the very heart of
what is now Russia. One of their earliest settlements in Russia was Novgorod the
Great. There is the same trouble and confusion for the student of history with
these northern tribes as there is with the Scythians of classical times, and
with the Hunnish Turkish peoples of Eastern and Central Asia. They appear under
a great variety of names, they change and intermingle. In the case of Britain,
for example, the Angles, the Saxons, and Jutes conquered most of what is now
England in the fifth and sixth centuries; the Danes a second wave of practically
the same people followed in the eighth and ninth; and in 1016 a Danish King,
Canute the Great reigned in England, and not only over England, but over Denmark
and Norway. His subjects sailed to Iceland, Greenland and perhaps to the
American continent for a time, Canute and his sons it seemed possible that a
great confederation of the Northmen might have established itself. Then in 1066
a third wave of the same people flowed over England from the «Norman» state in
France, where the Northmen had been settled since the days of Rolf the Ganger
(912), and where they had learnt to speak French. William, Duke of Normandy,
became the William the Conqueror (1066) of English history. Practically, from
the standpoint of universal history, all these peoples were the same people,
waves of one Nordic stock. These waves were not only flowing westward, but
eastward. Already we have mentioned a very interesting earlier movement of the
same peoples under the name of Goths from the Baltic to the Black Sea. We have
traced the splitting of these Goths into the Ostrogoths and the Visisigoths, and
the adventurous wanderings that ended at last in the Ostrogoth kingdom in Italy
and the Visigoth states in Spain. In the ninth century a second-movement of the
North-men men across Russia was going on at the same time that their
establishments in England and their dukedom of Normandy were coming into
existence. The population of South Scotland, England, East Ireland, Flanders,
Normandy, and the Russias have more elements in common than we are accustomed to
recognize. All are fundamentally Gothic and Nordic peoples. Even in their
weights and measures the kinship of Russian and English is to be noted; both
have the Norse inch and foot, and many early Norman churches in England are
built on a scale that shows the use of the sajene (7 ft.) and quarter sajene, a
Norse measure still used in Russia. These «Russian» Norsemen travelled in the
summer-time, using the river routes that abounded in Russia; they carried their
ships by portages from the northward-running rivers to those flowing southward.
They appeared as pirates, raiders, and traders both upon the Caspian and the
Black Sea. The Arabic chroniclers note their apparition upon the Caspian, and
learnt to call them Russians. They raided Persia, and threatened Constantinople
with a great fleet of small craft (in 865, 904, 941, and 1043).\ [#fn11]_  One of
these Northmen, Rurik (circa 850), established himself as the ruler of Novgorod
and his successor, the duke Oleg, took Kief, and laid the foundations of modern
Russia. The fighting qualities of the Russian Vikings were speedily appreciated
at Constantinople; the Greeks called them Varangians, and an Imperial Varangian
bodyguard was formed. After the conquest of England by the Normans (1066), a
number of Danes and English were driven into exile and joined these Russian
Varangians, apparently finding few obstacles to intercourse in their speech and
habits.

.. _Figure 633:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0633.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0633.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 633

    Figure 633: Map — Empire of Otto the Great

Meanwhile the Normans from Normandy were also finding their way into the
Mediterranean from the West. They came first as mercenaries, and later as
independent invaders; and they came mainly, not, it is to be noted, by sea, but
in scattered bands by land. They came through the Rhineland and Italy partly in
the search for warlike employment and loot, partly as pilgrims. For the ninth
and tenth centuries saw a great development of pilgrimage. These Normans, as
they grew powerful, discovered themselves such rapacious and vigorous robbers
that they forced the Eastern Emperor and the Pope into a feeble and ineffective
alliance against them (1053). They defeated and captured and were pardoned by
the Pope; they established themselves in Calabria and South Italy, conquered
Sicily from the Saracens (1060-1090), and under Robert Guiscard, who had entered
Italy as a pilgrim adventurer and began his career as a brigand in Calabria,
threatened the Byzantine Empire itself (1081). His army, which contained a
contingent of Sicilian Moslems, crossed from Brindisi to Epirus in the reverse
direction to that in which Pyrrhus had crossed to attack the Roman Republic,
thirteen centuries before (275 B.C.). He laid siege to the Byzantine stronghold
of Durazzo.

Robert captured Durazzo (1082), but the pressure of affairs in Italy recalled
him, and ultimately put an end to this first Norman attack upon the Empire of
Byzantium, leaving the way open for the rule of a comparatively vigorous
Comnenian dynasty (1081-1204). In Italy, amidst conflicts too complex for us to
tell here, it fell to Robert Guiscard to besiege and sack Rome (1084); and
Gibbon notes with quiet satisfaction the presence of that contingent of Sicilian
Moslems amongst the looters. There were in the twelfth century three other
Norman attacks upon the Eastern power, one by the son of Robert Guiseard, and
the two others directly from Sicily by sea. . . .

But neither the Saracens nor the Normans pounded quite so heavily against the
old empire at Byzantium or against the Holy Roman Empire, the vamped-up, Roman
Empire of the West, as did the double thrust from the Turanian centres in
Central Asia, of which we must now tell. We have already noted the westward
movement of the Avars, and the Turkish Magyars who followed in their track. From
the days of Pepin I onward, the Frankish power and its successors in Germany
were in conflict with these Eastern raiders along all the Eastern
borderlands.

Charlemagne held and punished them, and established some sort of overlordship
as far east as the Carpathians; but amidst the enfeeblement that followed his
death, these peoples, more or less blended now in the accounts under the name of
Hungarians, led by the Magyars, re-established their complete freedom again, and
raided yearly, often as far as the Rhine. They destroyed, Gibbon notes, the
monastery of St. Gall in Switzerland, and the town of Bremen. Their great
raiding period was between 900 and 950. Their biggest effort, through Germany
right into France, thence over the Alps and home again by North Italy, was in
938-9.

.. _Figure 634:
.. figure:: /_static/figures/0634.png
    :target: ../_static/figures/0634.png
    :figclass: inline-figure
    :width: 280px
    :alt: Figure 634

    Figure 634: Map — Coming of the Seljuks

Thrust southward by these disturbances, and by others to be presently noted,
the Bulgarians established themselves under Krum, between the Danube and
Constantinople. Originally a Turkish people, the Bulgarians, since their first
appearance in the east of Russia, had become by repeated admixture almost
entirely Slavonic in race and language. For some time after their establishment
in Bulgaria they remained pagan. Their king, Boris (852-884), entertained Moslem
envoys, and seems to have contemplated an adhesion to Islam, but finally he
married a Byzantine princess, and handed himself and his people over to the
Christian faith.

The Hungarians were drubbed into a certain respect for civilization by Henry
the Fowler, the elected King of Germany and Otto the First, the first Saxon
emperor, in the tenth century. But they did decide to adopt Christianity until
about A.D. 1000. Though they were Christianized, they retained their own
Turko-Finnic language (Magyar), and they retain it to this day.

Bulgarians and Hungarians do not, however, exhaust the catalogue of the
peoples whose westward movements embodied the Turkish thrust across South
Russia. Behind the Hungarians and Bulgarians thrust the Khazars, a Turkish
people, with whom were mingled a very considerable proportion of Jews who had
been excelled from Constantinople and who had mixed with them and made many
proselytes. To these Jewish Khazars are to be ascribed the great settlements of
Jews in Poland and Russia.\ [#fn12]_  Behind the Khazars again, and overrunning them,
were the Petschenegs (or Patzinaks), a savage Turkish people who are first heard
of in the ninth century, and who were destined to dissolve and vanish as the
kindred Huns did five centuries before. And while the trend of all these peoples
was westward, we have, when we are thinking of the present population of these
South Russian regions, to remember also the coming and going of the Northmen
between the Baltic and the Black Sea, who interwove with the Turkish migrants
like warp and woof, and bear in mind also that there was a considerable Slavonic
population, the heirs and descendants of Scythians, Sarmatians, and the like,
already established in these restless, lawless, but fertile areas. All these
races mixed with and reacted upon one another. The universal prevalence of
Slavonic languages, except in Hungary, shows that the population remained
predominantly Slav. And in what is now Roumania, for all the passage of peoples,
and in spite of conquest after conquest, the tradition, and inheritance of the
Roman provinces of Dacia and Moesia Inferior still kept a Latin speech and
memory alive.

But this direct thrust of the Turkish peoples against Christtendom to the
north of the Black Sea was in the end, not nearly so, important as their
indirect thrust south of it through the empire of the Caliph. We cannot deal
here with the tribes and dissensions of the Turkish peoples; of Turkestan, nor
with the particular causes that brought to the fore the tribes under the rule of
the Seljuk clan. In the eleventh century these Seljuk Turks broke with
irresistible force not in one army, but in a group of armies, and under two
brothers, into the decaying fragments of the Moslem Empire. For Islam had long
ceased to be one empire. The orthodox Sunnite Abbasid rule had shrunken to what
was once Babylonia; and even in Bagdad the Caliph was the mere creature of his
Turkish palace guards. A sort of mayor of the palace, a Turk, was the real
ruler. East of the Caliph, in Persia, and west of him in Palestine, Syria, and
Egypt, were Shiite heretics. The Seljuk Turks were orthodox Sunnites; they now
swept down upon and conquered the Shiite rulers and upstarts, and established
themselves as the protectors of the Bagdad Caliph, taking over the temporal
powers of the mayor of the palace. Very early they conquered Armenia from the
Greeks, and then, breaking the bounds that had restrained the power of Islam for
four centuries, they swept on to the conquest of Asia Minor, almost to the gates
of Constantinople The mountain barrier of Cilicia that had hold the Moslem so
long had been turned by the conquest of Armenia from the north-east. Under Alp
Arslan, who had united all the Seljuk power in his own hands, the Turks utterly
smashed the Byzantine army at the battle of Manzikert or Melasgird (1071). The
effect of this battle upon people's imaginations was very great. Islam, which
had appeared far gone in decay, which had been divided religiously and
politically, was suddenly discovered to have risen again, and it was the secure
old Byzantine Empire that seemed on the brink of dissolution. The loss of Asia
Minor was very swift. The Seljuks established themselves at Iconium (Konia), in
what is now Anatolia. In a little while they were in possession of the fortress
of Nicaea over against the capital.

.. [#fn11] These dates are from Gibbon. Beazley gives 865, 904-7, 935, 944, 971-2. (:t:`History of Russia`, Clarendon Press.)

.. [#fn12] "A Turkish people whose leaders had adopted Judaism," says Harold Williams.
