
32.9 How Constantinople Appealed to Rome
========================================================================
We have already told of the attack of the Normans upon the Byzantine Empire
from the west, and of the battle of Durazzo (1081); and we have noted that
Constantinople had still vivid memories of the Russia sea raids (1043).
Bulgaria, it is true, had been tamed, but there was heavy and uncertain warfare
going-on with the Petschenegs. North and west, the emperor's hands were full.
This swift advance of the Turks into country that had been so long securely
Byzantine must have seemed like the approach of final disaster. The Eastern
Emperor, Michael VII, under the pressure of these convergent dangers, took a
step that probably seemed both to himself and to Rome of the utmost political
significance. He appealed to the Pope; Gregory VII, for assistance. His appeal
was repeated still more urgently by big successor, Alexius Comnenus, to Pope
Urban II.

To the counsellors of Rome this must have presented itself as a supreme
opportunity for the assertion of the headship of the Pope over the entire
Christian world.

In this history we have traced the growth of this idea of a religious
government of Christendom-and through Christendom of mankind-and we have shown
how naturally and how necessarily, because of the, tradition of world empire, it
found a centre at Rome. The Pope of Rome was the only Western patriarch; he was
the religious head of a vast region in which the ruling tongue was Latin; the
other patriarchs of the Orthodox Church spoke Greek, and so were inaudible
throughout his domains; and the word *filioque*, which had been added to
the Latin creed, had split off the Byzantine Christians by one of those
Impalpable and elusive doctrinal points upon which there is no reconciliation.
(The final rupture was in 1054.) The life of the Lateran changed in its quality
with every occupant of the chair of St. Peter: sometimes papal Rome was a den of
corruption and uncleanness, as it had been in the days of John XII; sometimes it
was pervaded by the influence of widely thinking and nobly thinking men. But
behind the Pope was the assembly of the cardinals, priests, and a great number
of highly educated officials, who never, even in the darkest and wildest days,
lost sight altogether of the very grand idea of a divine world dominion, of a
peace of Christ throughout the earth that St. Augustine had expressed. Through
all the Middle Ages that idea was the guiding influence in Rome. For a time,
perhaps, mean minds would prevail there, and in the affairs of the world Rome
would play the part of a greedy, treacherous, and insanely cunning old woman;
followed a phase of masculine and quite worldly astuteness perhaps, or a phase
of exaltation. Came an interlude of fanaticism or pedantry, when all the
pressure was upon exact doctrine. Or there was a moral collapse, and the Lateran
became the throne of some sensuous or aesthetic autocrat, ready to sell every
hope or honour the church could give for money to spend upon pleasure or
display. Yet, on the whole, the papal ship kept its course, and came presently
into the wind again.

In this period to which we have now come, the period of the eleventh century,
we discover a Rome dominated by the personality of an exceptionally great
statesman, Hildebrand, who occupied various official positions under a
succession of Popes, and finally became Pope himself under the name of Gregory
VII (1073-1085). We find that under his influence, vice, sloth and corruption
have been swept out of the church, that the method of electing the Popes has
been reformed, and that a great struggle has been waged with the Emperor upon
the manifestly vital question of «investitures», the question whether Pope or
temporal monarch should have the decisive voice in the appointment of the
bishops in their domains. Vital that question was not only to the church, but to
the monarchs, for in many countries more than a quarter of the land was clerical
property. Hitherto the Roman clergy had been able to marry; but now, to detach
them effectually from the world and to make them more completely the instruments
of the church, celibacy was imposed upon all priests. . . .

Gregory VII had been prevented by his struggle over the investitures from any
effectual answer to the first appeal from Byzantium; but he had left a worthy
successor in Urban II (1087-1099); and when the letter of Alexius came to hand,
Urban seized at once upon the opportunity it afforded for drawing together all
the thoughts and forces of Western Europe into one passion and purpose. Thereby
he might hope to end the private warfare that prevailed, and find a proper
outlet for the immense energy of the Normans. He saw, too, an opportunity of
thrusting the Byzantine power and Church aside, and extending the influence of
the Latin Church over Syria, Palestine, and Egypt. The envoys of Alexius were
heard at a church council, hastily summoned at Piazenza (= Placentia), and next
year (1095) at Clermont, Urban held a second great council, in which all the
slowly gathered strength of the Church was organized for a universal war
propaganda against the Moslems. Private war, all war among Christians, was to
cease until the infidel had been swept back and the site of the Holy Sepulchre
was again in Christian hands.

The fervour of the response enables us to understand the great work of
creative organization that had been done in Western Europe in the previous five
centuries. In the beginning of the seventh century we saw Western Europe as a
chaos of social and political fragments, with no common idea nor hope, a system
shattered almost to a dust of self-seeking individuals. Now in the dawn of the
eleventh century there is everywhere a common belief, linking idea, to which men
may devote themselves, and by which they can cooperate together in a universal
enterprise. We realize that, in spite of much weakness and intellectual and
moral unsoundness, to this extent the Christian Church has *worked.* We are
able to measure the evil phases of tenth-century Rome, the scandals, the
filthiness, the murders and violence, at their proper value by the scale of this
fact. No doubt also all over Christendom there had been many lazy, evil, and
foolish priests; but it is manifest that this task of teaching and co-ordination
that had been accomplished could have been accomplished only through a great
multitude of right-living priests and monks and nuns. A new and greater
amphictyony, the amphictyony of Christendom, had come into the world, and it had
been built by thousands of anonymous, faithful lives.

And this response to the appeal of Urban the Second was not confined only to
what we should call educated people. It was not simply knights and princes who
were willing to go upon this crusade. Side by side with the figure of Urban we
must put the figure of Peter the Hermit, a type novel to Europe, albeit a little
reminiscent of the Hebrew prophets. This man appeared preaching the crusade to
the common people. He told a story whether truthful or untruthful hardly matters
in this connection-of his pilgrimage to Jerusalem, of the wanton destruction at
the Holy Sepulchre by the Seljuk Turks, who took it in 1073, and of the
exactions, brutalities, and deliberate cruelties practised upon the Christian
pilgrims to the Holy Places. Barefooted, clad in a coarse garment, riding on an
ass, and bearing a huge cross, this man travelled about France and Germany, and
everywhere harangued vast crowds in church or street or market-place.

Here for the first time we discover Europe with an idea and a soul! Here is a
universal response of indignation at the story of a remote wrong, a swift
understanding of a common cause for rich and poor alike. You cannot imagine this
thing happening in the Empire of Augustus Cæsar, or indeed in any previous state
in the world's history. Something of the kind might perhaps have been possible
in the far smaller world of Hellas, or in Arabia before Islam. But this movement
affected nations, kingdoms, tongues, and peoples. It is clear that we are
dealing with something new that has come into the world, a new clear connection
of the common interest with the consciousness of the common man.

